Title: Context Kubernetes: Declarative Orchestration of Enterprise Knowledge for Agentic AI Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11623v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 02:31:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
CONTEXT KUBERNETES: DECLARATIVE ORCHESTRATION OF ENTERPRISE KNOWLEDGE FOR AGENTIC AI SYSTEMS 

CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

OPIT – Open Institute of Technology, and Cohorte AI, Paris, France. 

charafeddine@cohorte.co 

ABSTRACT . Every computational era produces a dominant primitive and a scaling cri-sis. Virtual machines needed VMware. Containers needed Kubernetes. AI agents need something that does not yet exist: an orchestration layer for organizational knowledge. We introduce Context Kubernetes , an architecture for orchestrating enterprise knowl-edge in agentic AI systems, together with a prototype implementation and experimental evaluation. The core observation is that delivering the right knowledge, to the right agent, with the right permissions, at the right freshness, within the right cost envelope—across an entire organization—is structurally analogous to the container orchestration problem that Kubernetes solved a decade ago. We develop this analogy into six core abstractions, a YAML-based declarative manifest for knowledge-architecture-as-code, a reconciliation loop, and a three-tier agent permission model where agent authority is always a strict subset of human authority. We implement a prototype ( ∼7,000 lines, 92 tests) and eval-uate it through eight experiments. Three value experiments provide the headline find-ings: (1) without governance, agents serve phantom content from deleted sources, de-liver contradictory information, and leak cross-domain data in 26.5% of queries; gov-erned routing eliminates phantom delivery and reduces noise by 14 percentage points; (2) without freshness monitoring, stale and deleted content is served silently; with rec-onciliation, staleness is detected in under 1 ms; (3) in five realistic attack scenarios, flat permissions block 0/5 attacks, basic RBAC blocks 4/5, and the three-tier model blocks all five—the attack RBAC misses is the one the three-tier model is specifically designed to catch. Five correctness experiments confirm: zero unauthorized context deliveries across all test queries, zero permission invariant violations, and architectural enforcement of out-of-band approval isolation that no surveyed enterprise platform provides. We identify four properties—heterogeneity, semantics, sensitivity, and learning—that make context orchestration harder than container orchestration, and argue that these properties make the solution more valuable. We conclude that Context Engineering will emerge as the defining infrastructure discipline of the AI era. 

Date : April 2026. 

Key words and phrases. Context orchestration, agentic AI infrastructure, declarative architecture, enter-prise knowledge management, AI governance, organizational intelligence, Kubernetes. 

1 

> arXiv:2604.11623v1 [cs.AI] 13 Apr 2026 2CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI

1. I NTRODUCTION  

> The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it.
> MARK WEISER , 1991

Every generation of computing infrastructure follows the same arc. A new primitive emerges—the virtual machine, the container, the serverless function. Pioneers demon-strate extraordinary results on a single machine. Then organizations try to deploy it at scale, and the same five problems appear: scheduling, permissions, health monitoring, state management, and auditability. These problems are solved not by improving the primitive but by building an orchestration layer above it. VMware orchestrated virtual machines. Kubernetes orchestrated containers. The orchestration layer, not the primitive itself, becomes the enduring infrastructure. The AI agent is the new primitive. A knowledge worker equipped with a local agent— Claude Code, Cursor, a LangGraph application—pointed at a well-organized folder on their laptop can replace significant portions of their SaaS tool stack with files and con-versation (Anthropic, 2024). The productivity gains are real: Gartner projects that 40% of enterprise applications will feature task-specific AI agents by end of 2026 (Gartner, 2025a), and the global AI agents market surpassed $9 billion in early 2026 (Grand View Research, 2025). The primitive works. The scaling crisis has already begun. Between January and March 2026, nearly $300 billion in market value was erased from the application software sector (CNBC, 2026) as enterprises recognized that AI agents make most SaaS interfaces optional. But going from one agent on one laptop to 2,000 agents across an organization immediately surfaces the same five problems: 

• Scheduling : Which knowledge reaches which agent, from which source, in what order? 

• Permissions : What can each agent read, write, and execute—and how does this relate to what its human can do? 

• Health monitoring : Is the knowledge the agent received current, complete, and cor-rect? 

• State management : How is organizational knowledge versioned, governed, and mi-grated? 

• Auditability : Who accessed what, when, through which agent, with what outcome? Gartner predicts that over 40% of agentic AI projects will be cancelled by 2027 due to insufficient governance (Gartner, 2025b). The technology is mature. The orchestration layer is missing. This paper introduces Context Kubernetes : a reference architecture for enterprise knowledge orchestration in agentic AI systems. For the broader enterprise agentic plat-form in which context orchestration operates, see Mouzouni (2026a). We develop the structural analogy between container orchestration and context orchestration into a con-crete architectural proposal with defined abstractions, a declarative manifest specifica-tion, and design invariants. The analogy is productive—every major Kubernetes prim-itive has a functional counterpart in the knowledge domain—but it is an analogy, not CONTEXT KUBERNETES 3

a formal isomorphism, and we are explicit about where it holds tightly and where it stretches. Scope. This paper presents an architecture, a prototype implementation, and an experi-mental evaluation. The architecture defines the abstractions and design invariants. The prototype (Section 6) implements the core components: Context Router, Permission En-gine, CxRI connectors, reconciliation loop, audit log, and a FastAPI service exposing the full Context API. The evaluation (Section 7) comprises five correctness experiments and three value experiments. We are explicit about what the experiments demonstrate (the system works as designed and governance matters) and what they do not (the prototype is not production-grade, has no LLM-assisted routing, and has not been deployed at a real organization). 1.1. The Orchestration Emergence Thesis. We propose the following general thesis: 

When a new computational primitive reaches organizational scale, the orchestra-tion layer that governs its lifecycle—scheduling, permissions, health, state, and audit—becomes the most valuable and enduring infrastructure layer, exceeding the value of the primitive itself. 

Historical evidence supports this thesis. VMware’s market capitalization exceeded that of any single hypervisor. Kubernetes’ ecosystem exceeds the value of any single container runtime. We argue that the orchestration layer for AI agent context will follow the same pattern: it will outlast any individual LLM, any agent framework, and any data source. LLMs will be replaced. Frameworks will evolve. The orchestration layer persists. 1.2. Contributions. This paper makes six contributions: (1) A reference architecture with six core abstractions, a declarative manifest specifica-tion, and a structural analogy to Kubernetes identifying where the mapping is tight, moderate, and loose (Sections 3.2–5). (2) A three-tier agent permission model built on the design invariant that agent author-ity is a strict subset of human authority, with out-of-band strong approval architec-turally isolated from the agent’s execution environment (Section 3.4). (3) A prototype implementation (∼7,000 lines of Python, 92 tests) comprising Con-text Router, Permission Engine, CxRI connectors, reconciliation loop, audit log, and HTTP API (Section 6). (4) Five correctness experiments demonstrating zero unauthorized context deliveries, zero permission invariant violations, sub-millisecond freshness detection, acceptable latency overhead, and architectural enforcement of approval isolation (Section 7.1). (5) Three value experiments demonstrating what goes wrong without governance (phantom content, data leaks, contradictory information) and what the three-tier model catches that alternatives do not (Section 7.2). (6) A platform approval survey documenting that no major enterprise agentic platform architecturally enforces out-of-band approval isolation (Section 3.4, Table 3). 1.3. Paper Organization. Section 2 establishes the container orchestration precedent and the enterprise agentic landscape. Section 3 presents the architecture. Section 4 introduces declarative context management. Section 5 develops the structural analogy. Section 6 de-scribes the prototype. Section 7 presents the experimental evaluation. Section 8 reviews related work. Section 9 discusses limitations and open problems. Section 10 concludes. 4 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

2. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 

2.1. The Container Orchestration Precedent. Docker (2013) standardized the container as a portable unit of compute. The Open Container Initiative (OCI) defined the image specification, making containers runtime-agnostic. But deploying containers at organiza-tional scale—scheduling across heterogeneous machines, service discovery, load balanc-ing, rolling updates, secrets management, and access control—created an orchestration crisis that no individual container could solve. Kubernetes (Burns et al., 2016; Verma et al., 2015) resolved this crisis through two in-novations that we identify as generalizable design patterns: Declarative desired-state management. Operators specify what they want (“3 replicas of this service, 512MB memory, accessible on port 443”), not how to achieve it. The specifica-tion is encoded in a YAML manifest, version-controlled in git, and applied to the cluster via an API. The reconciliation loop. A continuous control loop monitors actual cluster state, com-pares it to the declared desired state, computes the delta, and takes corrective action. The system converges toward the declared state without human intervention. These two patterns—desired-state declaration and continuous reconciliation—are not specific to containers. They are general solutions to the problem of managing any com-putational primitive at organizational scale. This paper applies them to organizational knowledge. 2.2. The Enterprise Agentic Landscape. By early 2026, every major enterprise platform vendor has shipped an agentic AI product. Table 1 summarizes the landscape. TABLE 1. Enterprise agentic platforms as of Q1 2026                    

> Platform Architecture Lock-in
> Microsoft Copilot Studio Semantic Kernel, Power Platform governance, M365 integration High Salesforce Agentforce Atlas engine, “System 2” reasoning, cooperative swarms High Google Vertex AI + Agentspace Cloud-native, Gemini models, A2A protocol contributor Med–High AWS Bedrock Agents 100+ FMs, ReAct loop, 6 guardrail types Medium NVIDIA AI Agent Platform NIM microservices, NeMo Guardrails, infras-tructure layer Medium LangGraph (LangChain) Graph-based state machines, human-in-the-loop Low CrewAI Role-based agents with tasks and crews Low AutoGen (Microsoft) Conversational multi-agent, event-driven Low OpenAI Agents SDK Lightweight multi-agent with handoff primi-tives Low

Every platform implements some version of a four-tier architecture: (1) reasoning engine, (2) tool/action layer, (3) memory/context layer, and (4) governance layer. The protocol stack is converging under the Agentic AI Foundation at the Linux Foundation: MCP (Anthropic, 2025) for agent-to-tool communication, A2A (Google, 2025) for agent-to-agent communication. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 5

The critical observation is that the governance layer is universally the weakest, least standardized, and most vendor-locked (Mouzouni, 2025). Copilot Studio’s governance cannot govern a LangGraph agent. Salesforce’s Einstein Trust Layer cannot audit a Bedrock Agent. Open-source frameworks provide orchestration but no governance. The governance gap is not a missing feature—it is a missing infrastructure layer .2.3. Requirements for Context Orchestration. From analysis of the vendor landscape and requirements elicited from enterprise deployment planning, we identify seven re-quirements for a context orchestration system. We ground these in the NIST AI Risk Management Framework (AI RMF) (National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2023) categories—Govern, Map, Measure, Manage—to ensure they are independently motivated rather than self-serving. 

Requirement 2.1 (Vendor Neutrality (NIST: Govern 1.2 — organizational context)) . The system must operate with any LLM, any agent framework, any cloud provider, and any data source. 

Requirement 2.2 (Declarative Management (NIST: Govern 1.5 — documentation and processes)) . The knowledge architecture must be expressible as a machine-readable, version-controlled specification. 

Requirement 2.3 (Agent Permission Separation (NIST: Govern 1.7 — delineation of au-thority)) . Agent permissions must be formally separated from user permissions. An agent’s capabilities must be a configurable strict subset of its user’s capabilities, with tiered human oversight. 

Requirement 2.4 (Context Freshness (NIST: Measure 2.6 — data quality and relevance)) .

The system must continuously monitor the currency of all knowledge and take corrective action when knowledge exceeds its configured time-to-live. 

Requirement 2.5 (Intent-Based Access (NIST: Map 1.5 — information management)) .

Agents must request knowledge by intent, not by location. The system must resolve intent to sources, filter by permissions, and rank by relevance within a token budget. 

Requirement 2.6 (Complete Auditability (NIST: Manage 4.2 — documentation of inci-dents and actions)) . Every knowledge access, every action, and every approval must be immutably logged with attribution, timestamp, and outcome. 

Requirement 2.7 (Organizational Intelligence (NIST: Manage 4.1 — continuous improve-ment)) . The system must accumulate cross-organizational knowledge from aggregate agent activity, without exposing individual data across permission boundaries. 3. C ONTEXT KUBERNETES : A RCHITECTURE 

3.1. Design Principles. Context Kubernetes is governed by seven design principles, each traceable to a requirement: (1) Declarative over imperative (Req. 2.2). Organizations declare the knowledge archi-tecture they want. The system reconciles reality to match. (2) Intent-based access over location-based (Req. 2.5). Agents request knowledge by semantic intent. The system resolves intent to sources, permissions, and rankings. (3) Governance as foundation, not afterthought (Req. 2.3, 2.4, 2.6). Permissions, fresh-ness monitoring, guardrails, and audit trails are structural components, not optional modules. 6 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

(4) Agent authority as strict subset of human authority (Req. 2.3). An architectural invariant. No mechanism exists for an agent to exceed its user’s scope. (5) Intelligence in the orchestration layer (Req. 2.5, 2.7). The routing layer uses LLM-assisted semantic parsing. Context Operators accumulate organizational intelli-gence. Unlike Kubernetes, the orchestration layer itself reasons—a property we examine critically in Section 9.2. (6) Vendor neutrality (Req. 2.1). Every component is defined by its interface, not its implementation. (7) Privacy by design. The system monitors the organizational boundary—knowledge requests, actions, approvals—not the individual. 3.2. Core Abstractions. We define six abstractions that constitute the foundational vo-cabulary of context orchestration. 

Definition 3.1 (Context Unit) . A context unit is the smallest addressable element of or-ganizational knowledge. Formally, u = (c, τ, m, v, e, π) where c is the content, τ ∈

{unstructured, structured, hybrid } is the type, m is a metadata set (author, timestamp, do-main, sensitivity, entities, source), v ∈ V is a version identifier, e ∈ Rd is an embedding vector, and π ⊆ R is the set of roles authorized to access this unit. 

Definition 3.2 (Context Domain) . A context domain is an isolation boundary for organiza-tional knowledge: D = ( N, S, A, F, ρ, O, G) where N is the domain identifier, S is the set of backing sources, A : R → 2Ops × Tier is the access control function, F is the freshness pol-icy, ρ is the routing configuration, O is the domain operator, and G is the guardrail set. A query within domain Di has no visibility into domain Dj unless explicitly brokered through the target domain’s operator with the requester’s permissions propagated. 

Definition 3.3 (Context Store) . A context store is a backing system that persists context units: s = ( σ, ι, ϕ) where σ is the store type (git repository, relational database, connector to external system, file system), ι is the ingestion configuration, and ϕ is the connection specification. Stores are accessed exclusively through the Context Runtime Interface. 

Definition 3.4 (Context Endpoint) . A context endpoint ε is a stable, intent-based interface for knowledge access. Given intent q, session scope ω, and agent permission profile α:

ε(q, ω, α) → {u1, . . . , uk} ⊆ U

subject to ∀ui: π(ui) ∋ role (α), fresh (ui), and P 

> i

|ui| ⩽ B where B is the token budget. The agent never specifies where knowledge lives—only what it needs. 

Definition 3.5 (Context Runtime Interface (CxRI)) . The CxRI is a standard adapter be-tween the orchestration layer and context stores. Every store implements six operations: 

connect (ϕ) → Connection query (conn, q) → {u1, . . . , un}

read (conn, path ) → u write (conn, path, c) → Result subscribe (conn, path ) → Stream health (conn ) → Status 

The CxRI ensures that the orchestration layer is permanently decoupled from any specific data source, analogous to Kubernetes’ Container Runtime Interface (CRI). 

Definition 3.6 (Context Operator) . A context operator is a domain-specific autonomous controller: O = ( K, L, I, Γ ) where K is a knowledge store (vector + full-text index), L

is a reasoning engine (LLM with domain guardrails), I is an organizational intelligence CONTEXT KUBERNETES 7

module, and Γ is the guardrail set. Operators extend the base system with domain intel-ligence, inspired by Kubernetes Operators (Dobies and Wood, 2020) that extend the base scheduler with application-specific logic. The intelligence module I extracts cross-organizational patterns from aggregate agent activity, subject to: minimum signal threshold θ ⩾ 3 (preventing premature pattern recognition), temporal clustering within window ∆t w, permission tagging (aggregated insights available to domain members; attributed insights require record-level authoriza-tion), and decay (insights degrade without supporting signals). The governance implica-tions of this module are discussed in Section 9.3. 3.3. System Architecture. Figure 1 presents the architecture. The system comprises seven services: Context Registry (metadata store, analogous to etcd ), Context Router (scheduling intelligence, analogous to kube-scheduler + Ingress ), Permission Engine (three-tier agent permission model, Section 3.4), Freshness Manager (continuous mon-itoring with four states: fresh, stale, expired, conflicted), Trust Policy Engine (declara-tive guardrail evaluation, anomaly detection, DLP, audit logging), Context Operators (domain-specific controllers, Def. 3.6), and LLM Gateway (prompt inspection and cost metering for enterprise deployments).                 

> AGENTS
> Local Agent
> Claude Code
> LangGraph App
> Custom Agent
> Context API (10 endpoints ·HTTPS + WSS ·JWT)
> CONTEXT KUBERNETES
> Context Registry
> Context Router
> Permission Engine
> Freshness Manager
> Trust Policy Engine
> Context Operators Observability LLM Gateway
> Reconciliation Loop ⟨desired state ∆
> ←→ actual state ⟩
> Context Runtime Interface (CxRI) —6 ops per connector
> CONTEXT SOURCES
> Git Repos Databases Email / Calendar
> SaaS APIs
> ERP / Legacy

FIGURE 1. Context Kubernetes reference architecture. 3.4. The Agent Permission Model. Existing RBAC models (Sandhu et al., 1996) manage human identities. They do not address autonomous agents acting on behalf of humans— agents that can reason, plan, and take multi-step actions without per-action human ap-proval. We propose two design invariants: 8 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

Design Invariant 3.7 (Agent Permission Subset) . For every user u with permission set 

Pu and agent au acting on behalf of u:

Pau ⊂ Pu

The inclusion is strict : for every user, there exists at least one operation that the user can perform but the agent cannot. For every shared operation o ∈ Pau , the required approval tier satisfies T (o, au) ⩾ T (o, u).This invariant is architectural : the Permission Engine computes Pau as a configured projection of Pu. No API exists for an agent to modify its own permission profile. We note that this invariant is a design commitment, not a formally verified property; a complete implementation would require verification that no code path allows escalation, which is a standard security engineering task but is not addressed in this paper. The three-tier approval model (Table 2) enforces graduated human oversight: TABLE 2. Three-tier agent approval model               

> Tier Agent Role Approval Mechanism Examples
> T1: Autonomous Acts freely None Read context, draft docs T2: Soft approval Proposes User confirms in agent UI Send internal message T3: Strong approval Surfaces task Out-of-band 2FA / biomet-ric Sign contract, financials Excluded Cannot request N/A (manual only) Terminate employee

Design Invariant 3.8 (Strong Approval Isolation) . For any Tier 3 action, the approval channel C satisfies: (1) C is external to the agent’s execution environment, (2) C is neither readable nor writable by the agent, and (3) C requires a separate authentication factor. This invariant prevents a compromised or hallucinating agent from self-approving high-stakes actions. To assess whether this gap is real, we surveyed the published secu-rity architectures of four major enterprise agentic platforms against the three conditions of Design Invariant 3.8. Table 3 summarizes the findings. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 9

TABLE 3. Approval isolation survey: four enterprise agentic platforms as-sessed against Design Invariant 3.8. All platforms provide human-in-the-loop mechanisms, but none enforces all three conditions architecturally. 

Platform HITL mechanism C1: External C2: Not R/W C3: Sep. factor 

MS Copilot Studio Request for Information via Outlook email; AI Approvals Partial a No b No SF Agentforce Guardrails (deterministic filters + LLM in-structions); escalation patterns No c No No AWS Bedrock User Confirmation via InvokeAgent API; AgentCore Cedar policy No d No e No Google Vertex AI require confirmation in ADK; be-fore tool callback 

No f No g No            

> aEmail delivery is external, but the response flows back into the agent flow as readable parameters. bRFI response data becomes dynamic content accessible to subsequent agent steps. cEscalation occurs within the same conversation channel managed by the Atlas Reasoning Engine. dAgentCore Gateway + Cedar policies operate outside agent code (strongest policy isolation surveyed), but the User Confirmation mechanism is in-band via the same API session. eConfirmation state is returned via sessionState in the same InvokeAgent request. fConfirmation events generated and consumed within the same ADK session.
> gADK documentation states that confirmed function calls are “explicitly injected into the subsequent LLM request context.”

Key finding. All four platforms provide human-in-the-loop mechanisms, but in every case the approval channel is in-band with the agent’s execution or conversation context. No platform enforces channel separation (approval delivery via a channel the agent cannot read or write). No platform requires separate-factor authentication for the approval act itself. AWS’s AgentCore Policy represents an important partial advance—deterministic policy enforcement outside agent code that the agent cannot bypass—but it provides binary allow/deny gating, not approval routing through an isolated channel. The gap between “external policy enforcement” and “external approval channel with separate-factor authentication” is precisely the contribution of Design Invariant 3.8. 3.5. The Reconciliation Loop. The reconciliation loop (Algorithm 1) continuously com-pares declared state D (from the manifest) against observed state A (from the registry and sources), computes drift ∆, and executes corrective actions. 10 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

Algorithm 1 Context Reconciliation Loop  

> 1:

loop  

> 2:

D ← READ MANIFEST ()  

> 3:

A ← OBSERVE STATE (registry , sources , operators ) 

> 4:

∆ ← {(d, a) | d ∈ D, a ∈ A, d̸ = a} 

> 5:

for each δ = ( type , target ) ∈ ∆ do  

> 6:

if δ.type = source disconnected then  

> 7:

Retry → mark dependents stale → alert  

> 8:

else if δ.type = context stale then  

> 9:

Apply freshness policy: re-sync | flag | archive  

> 10:

else if δ.type = operator unhealthy then  

> 11:

Restart operator → alert  

> 12:

else if δ.type = anomaly then  

> 13:

Evaluate policy → alert | throttle | suspend  

> 14:

else if δ.type = reliability drift then  

> 15:

Trigger recertification (Mouzouni, 2026c)  

> 16:

else if δ.type = permission change then  

> 17:

Propagate to active sessions  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

UPDATE REGISTRY (A) 

> 21:

wait ∆t r 

> 22:

end loop 

We state two intended design goals for the reconciliation loop. These are not for-mally proven; they are design commitments that an implementation must satisfy and that should be verified through testing and, ideally, model-checking (e.g., TLA+ or Al-loy). 

Design Goal 3.9 (Safety) . The reconciliation loop should preserve: (1) Permission safety :no context unit is delivered to an agent whose permission profile does not include the unit’s access scope; if the Permission Engine is unavailable, all requests are denied (fail-closed). (2) Freshness safety : no context unit past its expired threshold is served; stale units are served with explicit staleness metadata. 

Design Goal 3.10 (Liveness) . Under the assumption that at least one CxRI connector per domain remains reachable: (1) every stale context unit is re-synced or flagged within 

2 · ∆t r, and (2) every disconnected source is detected within ∆t r.4. D ECLARATIVE CONTEXT MANAGEMENT 

4.1. Knowledge Architecture as Code. Kubernetes introduced Infrastructure as Code. Context Kubernetes introduces Knowledge Architecture as Code : the organizational knowledge landscape—sources, permissions, freshness policies, routing rules, trust policies, and operator configurations—expressed as a declarative manifest, version-controlled in git, reviewed before application, and continuously reconciled. 4.2. The Context Architecture Manifest. The manifest specification comprises seven sections. Listing 1 shows a representative domain declaration. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 11  

> 1

a p i V e r s i o n : c o n t e x t / v1  

> 2

k i n d : ContextDomain  

> 3

metadata :  

> 4

name : s a l e s  

> 5

namespace : acme - c o r p  

> 6

l a b e l s : – s e n s i t i v i t y : c o n f i d e n t i a l , owner : head - o f - s a l e s ˝  

> 78

s p e c :  

> 9

s o u r c e s :  

> 10

- name : c l i e n t - c o n t e x t  

> 11

t y p e : g i t - r e p o  

> 12

c o n f i g : – r e p o : g i t @ c t x . i n t e r n a l : s a l e s / c l i e n t s . g i t ˝  

> 13

r e f r e s h : r e a l t i m e  

> 14

i n g e s t i o n : – chunking : semantic , c h u n k S i z e : 5 0 0 ,  

> 15

embedding : t e x t - embedding - 3 - s m a l l ˝  

> 16

- name : p i p e l i n e  

> 17

t y p e : c o n n e c t o r  

> 18

c o n f i g : – system : s a l e s f o r c e , s c o p e : o p p o r t u n i t i e s ,  

> 19

c r e d e n t i a l s : v a u l t : / / s f / key ˝  

> 20

r e f r e s h : 1h  

> 21

- name : communications  

> 22

t y p e : c o n n e c t o r  

> 23

c o n f i g : – system : gmail , f i l t e r : ” l a b e l : c l i e n t - comms” ˝  

> 24

r e f r e s h : 15m  

> 25

i n g e s t i o n : – chunking : per - thread , t t l : 180 d˝  

> 26 27

a c c e s s :  

> 28

r o l e s :  

> 29

- r o l e : s a l e s - r e p  

> 30

r e a d : [ ” c l i e n t s / $– a s s i g n e d ˝/* ” ]  

> 31

w r i t e : [ ” c l i e n t s / $– a s s i g n e d ˝/* ” ]  

> 32

- r o l e : s a l e s - manager  

> 33

r e a d : [ ” * ” ]  

> 34

w r i t e : [ ” * ” ]  

> 35

a g e n t P e r m i s s i o n s :  

> 36

r e a d : autonomous  

> 37

w r i t e :  

> 38

d e f a u l t : s o f t - a p p r o v a l  

> 39

p a t h s :  

> 40

” */ c o n t r a c t s /* ” : s t r o n g - a p p r o v a l  

> 41

” p i p e l i n e /* ” : autonomous  

> 42

e x e c u t e :  

> 43

send - i n t e r n a l - msg : s o f t - a p p r o v a l  

> 44

send - e x t e r n a l - e m a i l : s t r o n g - a p p r o v a l  

> 45

commit - to - p r i c i n g : e x c l u d e d  

> 46

crossDomain :  

> 47

- – domain : o p e r a t i o n s , mode : b r o k e r e d ˝  

> 48

- – domain : f i n a n c e , mode : b r o k e r e d ˝  

> 49

- – domain : hr , mode : d e n i e d ˝  

> 50 51

f r e s h n e s s :  

> 52

d e f a u l t s : –maxAge : 24h , s t a l e A c t i o n : f l a g ˝  

> 53

o v e r r i d e s :  

> 54

- – path : ” */ communications /* ” , maxAge : 4h ,  

> 55

s t a l e A c t i o n : re - sync ˝  

> 56

- – path : ” p i p e l i n e /* ” , maxAge : 1h ,  

> 57

s t a l e A c t i o n : re - sync ˝  

> 58 59

r o u t i n g :  

> 60

i n t e n t P a r s i n g : llm - a s s i s t e d  

> 61

tokenBudget : 8000 12 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI  

> 62

p r i o r i t y :  

> 63

- – s i g n a l : s e m a n t i c ˙ r e l e v a n c e , w e i g h t : 0 . 4 0 ˝  

> 64

- – s i g n a l : r e c e n c y , w e i g h t : 0 . 3 0 ˝  

> 65

- – s i g n a l : a u t h o r i t y , w e i g h t : 0 . 2 0 ˝  

> 66

- – s i g n a l : u s e r ˙ r e l e v a n c e , w e i g h t : 0 . 1 0 ˝  

> 67 68

o p e r a t o r :  

> 69

t y p e : master - a g e n t  

> 70

t e m p l a t e : s a l e s - v2  

> 71

i n t e l l i g e n c e :  

> 72

p a t t e r n E n g i n e : – m i n S i g n a l s : 3 , window : 30d˝  

> 73

g u a r d r a i l s :  

> 74

- ”CANNOT commit t o p r i c i n g w i t h o u t a p p r o v a l ”  

> 75

- ”CANNOT s h a r e c l i e n t A data with c l i e n t B”  

> 76 77

t r u s t :  

> 78

p o l i c i e s :  

> 79

- name : no - unreviewed - e x t e r n a l - e m a i l  

> 80

t r i g g e r : a c t i o n . s e n d ˙ e m a i l  

> 81

c o n d i t i o n : r e c i p i e n t . domain != company . domain  

> 82

a c t i o n : r e q u i r e ˙ a p p r o v a l ( t i e r : s t r o n g )  

> 83

a n o m a l y D e t e c t i o n :  

> 84

b a s e l i n e : per - u s e r - per - r o l e  

> 85

t h r e s h o l d : 3x  

> 86

r e s p o n s e : a l e r t - admin  

> 87

a u d i t : – l e v e l : f u l l , r e t e n t i o n : 7y˝  

> 88 89

r e l i a b i l i t y :  

> 90

minLevel : 0 . 9 0  

> 91

method : t r u s t g a t e  

> 92

s c h e d u l e : – d e p l o y : t r u e , model - change : t r u e ,  

> 93

monthly : t r u e ˝ 

LISTING 1. Context Domain Manifest for a Sales domain 4.3. Context Migration as Rolling Update. Knowledge migration follows the Kuber-netes rolling-update pattern: (1) Connect : attach CxRI connectors, all data stays in place; (2) Duplicate & Shift : extract narrative data into git-versioned context files, both sources in parallel with incremental sync; (3) Consolidate : sunset redundant tools, keep essential ones as connectors; (4) Steady state : organization operates on Context Kubernetes, no agent code changes during migration. 5. T HE STRUCTURAL ANALOGY 

Table 4 presents the complete mapping between Kubernetes primitives and their context orchestration counterparts. We use the term structural analogy rather than isomor-phism : many mappings are tight functional equivalences (CRI ↔ CxRI, RBAC ↔ Agent Permission Profile), but others are looser design inspirations (Service Mesh ↔ Trust Layer, HPA ↔ Context Caching). We mark the tightness of each mapping explicitly. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 13 

TABLE 4. Structural analogy: Kubernetes ↔ Context Kubernetes. Tight-ness: Tight (functional equivalence), Moderate (shared pattern, different mechanics), Loose (design inspiration).                                                           

> Kubernetes Context K8s Shared function
> Pod Context Unit Smallest schedulable/addressable unit TNamespace Context Domain Isolation boundary with scoped access TDeployment Context Architecture Declared desired state TRBAC Agent Perm. Profile Role →capabilities (extended with tiers) TCRI CxRI Standard runtime adapter Tetcd Context Registry Authoritative metadata store Tkubectl / API Context API Programmatic control interface TIngress Context Router Routes external requests to internal re-sources MPersistent Volume Context Store Durable storage abstracted by interface MLiveness Probe Freshness Manager Health monitoring with corrective action MRolling Update Context Migration Gradual replacement preserving availability MOperator Context Operator Domain-specific controller extending base system MService Context Endpoint Stable abstract interface MConfigMap/Secret Context Classification Metadata governing handling LHPA Context Caching Demand-based scaling LService Mesh Trust Layer Policy enforcement and observability LHelm Chart Architecture Template Packaged configurations L

5.1. Where Context Orchestration Extends Beyond Containers. Four properties make context orchestration fundamentally harder—and more valuable—than container orches-tration: 

1. Heterogeneity. Containers are standardized (OCI image spec). Context units span markdown, PDFs, email threads, database rows, Slack messages, and binary documents. The CxRI must normalize this diversity while preserving type-specific semantics. 

2. Semantics. Container scheduling is deterministic: request 3 replicas, receive 3 repli-cas. Context routing requires judgment : “Get me the Henderson context” demands dis-ambiguation, role-aware scoping, and relevance ranking. This is why the Context Router embeds LLM-assisted intelligence—the orchestration layer itself reasons. This is also the architecture’s deepest tension, discussed in Section 9.2. 

3. Sensitivity. Containers are access-neutral. Context has sensitivity levels, owner-ship, and regulatory constraints. The trust layer has no Kubernetes equivalent and is the primary driver of enterprise adoption. 

4. Learning. Containers are stateless by design. Context Operators accumulate orga-nizational intelligence. The system becomes more valuable over time—a property that has no container analog and raises novel governance questions (Section 9.3). Table 5 maps each property to the component that addresses it and the open problem that remains. 14 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

TABLE 5. Four distinguishing properties: architectural response and open problems 

Property Component & mechanism Open problem 

Heterogeneity CxRI + ingestion pipelines normalize all sources into uniform context units No standard for context unit serialization (cf. OCI image spec); cross-type semantic alignment un-solved Semantics Context Router with LLM-assisted intent parsing +multi-signal ranking Probabilistic routing can violate governance guar-antees; fallback degrades on ambiguous queries (§9.2) Sensitivity Permission Engine + Trust Policy Engine: strict-subset invariant, 3-tier approval, DLP Formal verification of non-escalation across chained workflows; side channels via rank-ing/truncation Learning Context Operators: pattern extraction ( θ ⩾ 3), decay, domain-owner review Emergent sensitivity of aggregates; legal discover-ability; feedback loops (§9.3) 

6. I MPLEMENTATION 

We implement Context Kubernetes as an open-source Python prototype. 1 The imple-mentation comprises seven components totaling ∼7,000 lines with 92 automated tests: 

• Context Router : rule-based intent classification with 7-domain keyword taxonomy (25+ keywords per domain), multi-signal ranking (recency, semantic relevance, au-thority, user relevance), token budget enforcement, intent caching, conversation-aware co-reference resolution. 

• Permission Engine : three-tier approval model, strict-subset invariant enforcement at registration time, OTP-based Tier 3 with out-of-band channel simulation, session management with kill switches (single/user/global). 

• CxRI connectors : Git repository (6 operations, file-to-ContextUnit conversion with git metadata), PostgreSQL (table search, schema discovery). 

• Reconciliation loop : freshness state machine (fresh/stale/expired), source health monitoring, consecutive-failure thresholds, event callbacks, configurable re-sync policies. 

• Audit log : append-only event recording (in-memory and JSONL file backends), queryable by session, user, event type. 

• Manifest parser : loads YAML domain manifests into typed Python objects. 

• FastAPI service : 10 HTTP endpoints implementing the Context API (sessions, con-text requests, action submission, approval resolution, audit queries, health checks). The prototype uses rule-based intent classification rather than LLM-assisted parsing. This is a deliberate design choice: it establishes a performance floor that any LLM inte-gration can only improve, and it ensures all experiments are reproducible without API dependencies. Section 9.2 discusses the implications.   

> 1Source code: https://github.com/Cohorte-ai/context-kubernetes CONTEXT KUBERNETES 15

Seed data for the experiments models a 10-person consulting firm with three clients, five context domains (clients, sales, delivery, HR, finance), and 12 context files containing realistic organizational knowledge. 7. E VALUATION 

We evaluate Context Kubernetes through eight experiments in two categories: five cor-rectness experiments that verify the system does what it claims, and three value experiments 

that demonstrate why governance matters. All experiments run against the prototype with the seed dataset. 7.1. Correctness Experiments. C1: Routing quality. 47 queries across 5 domains with ground-truth relevance labels. The rule-based router achieves 70.2% domain classifica-tion accuracy and 0.665 MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank). Average routing latency: 202 ms. This establishes a floor: LLM-assisted parsing would improve domain accuracy but the permission and freshness guarantees hold regardless of classification quality. 

C2: Permission correctness. 7 test cases including authorized access, cross-domain denial, kill switch, and invariant violation attempts. Result: zero unauthorized con-text deliveries, zero false positives, zero invariant violations . A bug found during development—the Git connector initially delivered context units without domain-scoped 

authorized roles , allowing cross-domain leakage—was detected by the experiment and fixed before release. 

C3: Freshness behavior. 9 scenarios testing stale detection, disconnect detection, recovery, re-sync triggering, and multi-source independence. Stale detection latency: 0.65 ms. Disconnect detection: 0.02 ms. Reconciliation cycle for 20 sources: 23 ms av-erage. All state transitions (fresh → stale → expired) verified. 

C4: Latency overhead. Context request latency across conditions: 81 ms (simple single-domain), 178 ms (cross-domain), 151 ms (50 concurrent agents at 6.6 queries/sec-ond). Direct file read baseline: 0.01 ms. The overhead is dominated by CxRI connector I/O and intent classification, not permission checking or freshness filtering. 

C5: Approval isolation. 8 tests verifying Design Invariant 3.8: OTP never appears in any API response accessible to the agent, 100 wrong OTP attempts all rejected, Tier 3 cannot be resolved through the Tier 2 path, replay attacks fail, expired OTPs rejected, kill switch blocks all subsequent actions. Result: 8/8 pass. Design Invariant 3.8 is architec-turally enforced. 

7.2. Value Experiments. The correctness experiments show the system works. The value experiments show why it matters —what goes wrong without governance and what the three-tier model catches that alternatives do not. 

V1: Governed vs. ungoverned context quality. The same 47 queries are processed through two pipelines: (a) ungoverned naive RAG (embed query, cosine similarity, top-

k, no permissions, no freshness) and (b) Context Kubernetes (intent routing, permission filtering, freshness filtering, multi-signal ranking). Results: 16 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

TABLE 6. Governed vs. ungoverned context delivery (47 queries) 

Metric Ungoverned Governed 

Content leak rate (cross-domain) 26.5% 21.6% Noise ratio (irrelevant units delivered) 81.6% 67.6% Total content leaks 88 76 Token waste 80.0% 79.9% 

The governed pipeline reduces noise by 14 percentage points and eliminates the most egregious leaks (HR data to sales agents, finance data to unauthorized roles). The modest improvement in token waste reflects the limitation of rule-based routing; LLM-assisted intent parsing would narrow the token budget to truly relevant content. The content leak reduction from 88 to 76 is driven entirely by the permission filter—the router retrieves similar candidates, but the Permission Engine strips unauthorized units before delivery. 

V2: Cost of no freshness governance. Four scenarios simulate realistic freshness prob-lems: outdated pricing, phantom content from a churned client, contradictory delivery status reports, and contact information for a terminated relationship. Without reconcil-iation, phantom content is served in 2 of 4 queries and contradictory information (“on track” and “at risk” for the same project) is delivered simultaneously. With reconcilia-tion, phantom content is blocked and conflicts are resolved by preferring the most recent version. 

V3: Three-tier vs. flat permissions. Five realistic attack scenarios test three permission models (Table 7): TABLE 7. Attack scenarios: three permission models compared 

Attack scenario No gov. RBAC CK8s 

Send email with confidential pricing Allowed Allowed Blocked ∗

Access HR salary data from sales session Allowed Blocked Blocked Sign contract autonomously Allowed Blocked Blocked Access finance records from sales role Allowed Blocked Blocked Modify client records autonomously Allowed Blocked Blocked 

Attacks blocked 0/5 4/5 5/5    

> ∗Context Kubernetes requires Tier 3 strong approval (out-of-band 2FA) for send email . Basic RBAC allows it because the role has email permission—RBAC cannot distinguish “email with pricing” from “email without pricing” at the permission model level. The three-tier model can, because agent-level operation classification is decoupled from role-level authorization.

The critical finding: the one attack that RBAC cannot block—an agent sending confi-dential pricing via email—is precisely the scenario that motivates the three-tier model. RBAC asks “can this role send email?” (yes). The three-tier model asks “can this agent 

send email autonomously ?” (no—requires strong approval). This distinction is the paper’s central contribution to access control for autonomous agents. 7.3. Gap Analysis. We assess six approaches against the seven requirements (Sec-tion 2.3), grounded in NIST AI RMF categories. Context Kubernetes is now rated “Impl.” (implemented and tested) rather than “Design” for requirements validated by the exper-iments above. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 17 

TABLE 8. Governance gap analysis (NIST AI RMF–grounded require-ments) 

Requirement CK8s (impl.) MS Copilot SF Agentforce AWS Bedrock Google Vertex DIY (OSS) 

R1: Vendor neutral Impl. Gap Gap Partial Partial Addr. R2: Declarative mgmt Impl. Gap Gap Gap Gap Gap R3: Agent perm sep. Impl. Partial Partial Partial Partial Gap R4: Context freshness Impl. Partial Partial Gap Gap Gap R5: Intent-based access Impl. Partial Partial Gap Partial Gap R6: Full auditability Impl. Addr. Addr. Addr. Partial Gap R7: Org. intelligence Design Gap Partial Gap Gap Gap 

> CK8s “Impl.” = implemented and tested in the prototype; “Design” = specified but not yet implemented (R7 requires the organizational intelligence module, which is designed but not evaluated). Other ratings are based on publicly documented capabilities as of Q1 2026.

8. R ELATED WORK 

Container orchestration. Kubernetes (Burns et al., 2016; Verma et al., 2015), Docker Swarm, and Mesos (Hindman et al., 2011) established the declarative orchestration para-digm for compute. Kubernetes Operators (Dobies and Wood, 2020) introduced domain-specific controllers. Context Kubernetes applies these patterns to knowledge, extending them with semantic routing, tiered permission models, and organizational intelligence. 

Distributed systems foundations. Lamport’s work on event ordering (Lamport, 1978) and coordination services (Hunt et al., 2010) inform the registry and reconciliation design. The desired-state model draws on the Borg control plane (Verma et al., 2015). 

Role-based access control. Sandhu et al. (Sandhu et al., 1996) formalized RBAC for human identities. Context Kubernetes extends RBAC to agent identities with the strict-subset invariant (Design Invariant 3.7) and three-tier approval. This extension is, to our knowledge, novel; we are not aware of prior RBAC formalizations that model au-tonomous agents as permission-subset principals of their human operators. 

Enterprise agentic platforms. Microsoft Copilot Studio (Microsoft, 2026), Salesforce Agentforce (Salesforce Engineering, 2026; Salesforce Architects, 2026), AWS Bedrock Agents (Amazon Web Services, 2026), Google Vertex AI (Google, 2025), and open-source frameworks (LangChain, 2025a; CrewAI, 2025; Microsoft Research, 2025) provide agent orchestration but not vendor-neutral context governance. Abou Ali et al. (Abou Ali et al., 2025) survey agentic AI architectures. Adimulam et al. (Adimulam et al., 2026) analyze multi-agent orchestration protocols. Context Kubernetes is designed to be orthogonal: it governs the knowledge layer regardless of agent framework. 

Agent governance and trust. NeMo Guardrails (NVIDIA, 2025) provides I/O filter-ing. Langfuse (Langfuse, 2025) and LangSmith (LangChain, 2025b) provide observabil-ity. Raza et al. (Raza et al., 2025) survey trust and security management for multi-agent systems. These address individual aspects; Context Kubernetes proposes a unified gov-ernance layer. 18 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

AI reliability certification. Mouzouni (Mouzouni, 2026c) introduces black-box relia-bility certification via self-consistency sampling and conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023). Context Kubernetes integrates this for operator deployment gating. 

Knowledge management. Nonaka and Takeuchi (Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995) estab-lished organizational knowledge creation theory. Alavi and Leidner (Alavi and Leidner, 2001) surveyed KM systems. Context Kubernetes addresses the infrastructure for making organizational knowledge agent-consumable —a challenge prior KM systems, designed for human consumption, did not address. 

Data governance and data mesh. Enterprise data catalogs (Collibra, Alation, Apache Atlas) manage metadata, lineage, and access policies for structured data assets but do not address intent-based context routing or agent-specific permission models. De-hghani’s data mesh paradigm (Dehghani, 2022), grounded in domain-driven design (Evans, 2003), shares structural principles with Context Kubernetes: domain-oriented ownership, declarative governance, and self-serve infrastructure. Context Kubernetes extends these principles to agent-consumable knowledge with semantic routing and organizational intelligence accumulation. Documented failure modes of data mesh— re-siloing through over-decentralization, domain team capacity gaps, and shared data product ownership ambiguity—are directly relevant to Context Domain design and in-form our cross-domain brokering mechanism. Federated knowledge graph techniques (Chen et al., 2021) demonstrate privacy-preserving pattern sharing across distributed knowledge stores, informing the design of cross-domain intelligence sharing in Context Operators. 

Context engineering. The emergence of context engineering as a discipline (Ra-masamy, 2026; InfoWorld, 2026; Vishnyakova, 2026) validates the need for systematic approaches to organizing enterprise knowledge for AI consumption. MCP (Anthropic, 2025) and A2A (Google, 2025) are transport protocols. Context Kubernetes operates at the governance layer above them. 

AI risk management. The NIST AI Risk Management Framework (National Insti-tute of Standards and Technology, 2023) provides a structured approach to AI gover-nance. The EU AI Act (enforcement beginning August 2026) will require organizations to demonstrate governance over high-risk AI systems. Context Kubernetes’ audit trail, permission model, and guardrail engine are designed to support compliance with these frameworks, though detailed compliance mapping is outside the scope of this paper. 9. D ISCUSSION 

9.1. Limitations. We are explicit about the prototype’s limitations: 

Rule-based routing only. The prototype uses keyword-based intent classification, not LLM-assisted parsing. This establishes a quality floor (70.2% domain accuracy, 0.665 MRR) but understates the architecture’s potential. The governed pipeline’s modest preci-sion improvement over ungoverned RAG (Table 6) is primarily a limitation of rule-based classification, not of governance itself—the permission and freshness layers deliver their guarantees regardless of routing quality. 

No production deployment. All experiments run against seed data in a local proto-type. The latency measurements (81–178 ms) are indicative but do not reflect production conditions (network latency, database load, concurrent real users). A production deploy-ment is the critical next step. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 19 

Single-author evaluation. The gap analysis (Table 8) and the experiment design are by the author. The approval isolation survey (Table 3) cites vendor documentation, but independent replication by practitioners with platform deployment experience would strengthen the findings. 

Design invariants tested, not formally proven. The 92 tests verify invariant enforce-ment empirically (including adversarial attempts). TLA+ and Alloy specifications have been written but not yet model-checked. We use “design invariant” and “design goal” to distinguish from formally verified properties. 

Organizational intelligence not implemented. Requirement R7 (Context Operators with pattern extraction, learning loops) is designed but not implemented in the proto-type. This is the most architecturally complex component and the hardest to evaluate without a multi-week deployment. 9.2. The LLM-in-the-Loop Tension. The Context Router uses LLM-assisted intent pars-ing for semantic understanding of agent requests. This creates a fundamental tension: asystem designed to provide governance guarantees depends on a non-deterministic, probabilistic component for routing decisions . If the LLM misclassifies intent, the wrong context may be retrieved—potentially crossing domain boundaries or returning irrelevant results. We identify three architectural mitigations, each with trade-offs: (1) Deterministic fallback. When LLM parsing confidence is below a threshold, fall back to rule-based keyword routing. Trade-off: reduced routing quality for ambigu-ous queries. (2) Intent classification caching. Cache LLM classifications for repeated query patterns. Trade-off: cached classifications may become stale as domain knowledge evolves. (3) Small, specialized models. Use small, fast, fine-tuned models for intent classifica-tion rather than general-purpose LLMs. Trade-off: requires training data and main-tenance. None of these fully resolves the tension. We consider this an open problem: how to build governance-grade infrastructure that incorporates probabilistic AI components without undermining its own guarantees. This is likely a general challenge for AI-native systems, not specific to Context Kubernetes. 9.3. Organizational Intelligence Governance. Context Operators accumulate cross-organizational patterns from aggregate agent activity. This raises governance questions that go beyond traditional data governance: 

• Emergent sensitivity. Individual signals may be non-sensitive, but the pattern that emerges may be sensitive. If all employees in a department are searching for layoff-related policies, the pattern itself is organizationally sensitive even if each individual query is authorized. 

• Memory auditability. Who audits what the operator has “learned”? The architec-ture includes an insights dashboard for domain owners, but the completeness and interpretability of this audit mechanism is an open question. 

• Legal discoverability. Can an operator’s accumulated knowledge be subpoenaed? If organizational insights are stored as indexed knowledge, they may be subject to le-gal discovery requirements that the organization did not anticipate when deploying the system. 

• Feedback loops. If operators influence agent behavior (through proactive insights), and agent behavior is what operators learn from, self-reinforcing feedback loops may 20 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

amplify biases or errors. The minimum signal threshold ( θ ⩾ 3) and decay mecha-nisms are designed to mitigate this, but their effectiveness is an empirical question. These questions map to specific legal frameworks that any deployment must address: 

• GDPR Article 22 prohibits decisions based solely on automated profiling that signif-icantly affect individuals; where organizational insights influence individual agent behavior, the system must ensure either genuine non-attributability or meaningful human review and explicit consent under Article 22(2). 

• eDiscovery obligations (US FRCP Rules 26, 34): organizational insights stored as indexed knowledge constitute electronically stored information subject to litigation hold and production obligations; retention and purge policies must account for legal discoverability from deployment day one. 

• NLRA Section 7 and NLRB guidance (GC Memo 23-02): aggregate pattern detec-tion from employee agent activity implicates protections against surveillance that chills protected concerted activity; a system that detects “all employees in depart-ment X are searching for layoff-related policies” must not enable retaliation against employees exercising labor rights. 

• EU AI Act (Regulation 2024/1689, Annex III §4(b)): a context orchestration system whose organizational intelligence module monitors or evaluates employee behavior through aggregate pattern analysis is likely classified as high-risk , triggering compre-hensive compliance obligations including risk management (Art. 9), transparency (Art. 13), human oversight (Art. 14), and a right to explanation. These are not implementation details—they are fundamental questions about what it means for an AI system to accumulate institutional memory, and they have specific legal answers that constrain system design. We do not claim to have fully resolved the design implications, but we identify the applicable legal frameworks to ensure that future implementations engage with them. 9.4. Security Considerations. A context orchestration system is a high-value target: it mediates access to all organizational knowledge. Key threats include: 

• Prompt injection via context. Malicious content in retrieved documents could manipulate agent behavior. Mouzouni (2026b) demonstrates that goal-reframing prompts trigger 38–40% exploitation rates in LLM agents even when explicit rules prohibit the behavior, confirming that prompt-level controls are insufficient and architectural guardrails are necessary. The Trust Policy Engine can scan for known injection patterns, but this is an arms race, not a solved problem. 

• Connector compromise. A compromised CxRI connector could return falsified con-text or exfiltrate queries. Connector isolation and mutual authentication mitigate but do not eliminate this risk. 

• Cross-domain inference. An agent may infer restricted information from the absence 

or shape of brokered responses, even if the content is properly filtered. This is a known limitation of any access-control system that returns partial results. 

• Operator knowledge poisoning. If the organizational intelligence module ingests corrupted signals, it may propagate incorrect patterns. The minimum signal thresh-old and domain-owner review are designed to mitigate this but cannot prevent all scenarios. CONTEXT KUBERNETES 21 

A complete threat model following a framework such as STRIDE or MITRE ATT&CK for AI systems is a prerequisite for production deployment but is outside the scope of this architectural paper. Deployment preconditions for design invariants. Design Invariants 3.7 and 3.8 and De-sign Goals 3.9 and 3.10 hold under the following deployment assumptions, which must be treated as prerequisites rather than optional hardening measures: (1) Mutual TLS between all middleware services and between the middleware and local agents. (2) CxRI connectors authenticate to source systems with credentials stored in a secrets vault; connectors are not writable by agents. (3) The middleware runtime (Permission Engine, Trust Policy Engine, Context Registry) is not compromised—standard infrastructure security applies. (4) LLM providers operate under data processing agreements that prohibit training on customer prompts. (5) The out-of-band approval channel (Tier 3) uses a separate authentication factor de-livered via a channel that is architecturally inaccessible to the agent’s process (e.g., a 2FA app on a personal device, not a browser session the agent controls). If any of these preconditions is violated, the corresponding invariant or design goal can-not be assumed to hold. 9.5. The Emergence of Context Engineering. DevOps emerged because deploying con-tainers at scale required a new operational discipline. Context Engineering is the op-erational discipline for knowledge infrastructure: designing context architectures, defin-ing permission models, managing context migration, operating reconciliation loops, and governing organizational intelligence. This role does not exist today in most organizations. We argue it will be essential in every organization that deploys AI agents at scale, just as DevOps became essential for organizations deploying containers at scale. The parallel is not just structural but organizational: new infrastructure primitives create new operational disciplines. 9.6. Future Work. Three directions would most strengthen the contribution. First, LLM-assisted intent routing : the prototype’s rule-based classifier is a floor; integrating a small model (e.g., gpt-4o-mini) for semantic intent parsing would improve domain accuracy and relevance precision, making the governed pipeline’s quality advantage over naive RAG more dramatic. Second, production deployment : a 4-week pilot at a real organi-zation would replace seed-data experiments with real-world metrics and surface design problems that lab conditions cannot. Third, formal verification : the TLA+ and Alloy specifications are written; model-checking them would elevate the safety and liveness claims from “tested empirically” to “verified formally.” 10. C ONCLUSION 

> Every new computational primitive produces a scaling crisis. Every scaling crisis is resolved by an orchestration layer. The orchestration layer outlasts the primitive.

We have introduced Context Kubernetes, an architecture for enterprise knowledge or-chestration in agentic AI systems, implemented it as an open-source prototype, and eval-uated it through eight experiments. 22 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

The experiments demonstrate three things. First, governance matters: without it, agents serve phantom content, deliver contradictory information, and leak cross-domain data—problems that are invisible until they cause damage. Second, the three-tier per-mission model catches what RBAC cannot: in five realistic attack scenarios, RBAC blocks four but misses the one where an agent sends confidential pricing via email—the exact scenario that motivates separating agent authority from user authority. Third, the ar-chitecture’s safety and freshness guarantees hold: zero unauthorized context deliveries, sub-millisecond staleness detection, and architectural enforcement of approval isolation that no surveyed enterprise platform provides. Four properties distinguish context orchestration from container orchestration: hetero-geneity, semantics, sensitivity, and learning. Each makes the problem harder. Each makes the solution more valuable. The most consequential claim in this paper is not architectural but organizational: Con-text Engineering will emerge as the defining infrastructure discipline of the AI era ,just as DevOps emerged for the container era. The organizations that invest in context infrastructure—declarative knowledge architectures, governed routing, organizational intelligence operators—will compound their advantage with every deployment. The question is not whether enterprises need an orchestration layer for organizational knowledge. The question is whether they build it or adopt it—and how soon. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The concept of Context Kubernetes emerged from the practical observation that a folder of well-organized text files and an AI agent constitute a personal operating system—and that scaling this paradigm to an organization is an orchestration problem, not an AI problem. The author thanks the enterprise architects and early practitioners who provided feedback on the architectural framework, and the open-source communi-ties behind Kubernetes, MCP, and A2A whose work made this synthesis possible. The author is grateful to the anonymous reviewers of an earlier version of this paper for detailed feedback that substantially improved the precision and honesty of the claims. REFERENCES 

Mohamad Abou Ali, Fadi Dornaika, and Jinan Charafeddine. Agentic AI: A comprehen-sive survey of architectures, applications, and future directions. Artificial Intelligence Review , 59(11), 2025. doi: 10.1007/s10462-025-11422-4. Apoorva Adimulam, Rajesh Gupta, and Sumit Kumar. The orchestration of multi-agent systems: Architectures, protocols, and enterprise adoption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13671 , 2026. Maryam Alavi and Dorothy E. Leidner. Review: Knowledge management and knowl-edge management systems: Conceptual foundations and research issues. MIS Quar-terly , 25(1):107–136, 2001. doi: 10.2307/3250961. Amazon Web Services. AWS Bedrock agents: How agents work. AWS Documentation, 2026. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/agents-how.html .Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. Conformal prediction: A gentle in-troduction. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 16(4):494–591, 2023. doi: 10.1561/2200000101. Anthropic. Building effective agents. Anthropic Research, 2024. https://www.anthropic. com/research/building-effective-agents .CONTEXT KUBERNETES 23 

Anthropic. Model context protocol: Specification. Model Context Protocol, 2025. Version 2025-11-25. https://modelcontextprotocol.io/ .Brendan Burns, Brian Grant, David Oppenheimer, Eric Brewer, and John Wilkes. Borg, omega, and Kubernetes. ACM Queue , 14(1):70–93, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2898442.2898444. Mingyang Chen, Wen Zhang, Zonggang Yuan, Yantao Jia, and Huajun Chen. FedE: Em-bedding knowledge graphs in federated setting. In Proceedings of the 10th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Graphs (IJCKG ’21) . ACM, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3502223. 3502233. CNBC. AI tools trigger SaaS software stocks selloff. CNBC, 2026. February 6, 2026. Nearly $300B in market value erased from application software sector. CrewAI. CrewAI: Framework for orchestrating role-playing autonomous AI agents. Cre-wAI Documentation, 2025. https://docs.crewai.com/introduction .Zhamak Dehghani. Data Mesh: Delivering Data-Driven Value at Scale . O’Reilly Media, 2022. ISBN 978-1-492-09239-1. Jason Dobies and Joshua Wood. Kubernetes Operators: Automating the Container Orchestra-tion Platform . O’Reilly Media, 2020. Eric Evans. Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software . Addison-Wesley, 2003. ISBN 978-0-321-12521-7. Gartner. Gartner predicts 40 percent of enterprise apps will feature task-specific AI agents by 2026. Gartner Press Release, 2025a. August 26, 2025. Gartner. Gartner predicts over 40 percent of agentic AI projects will be canceled by end of 2027. Gartner Press Release, 2025b. June 25, 2025. Google. A2A: A new era of agent interoperability. Google Developers Blog, 2025. Agent-to-Agent protocol donated to Linux Foundation. 50+ partners. Grand View Research. Global AI agents market size report, 2025–2030. Grand View Research, 2025. Market surpassed $9B in 2026, projected from $7.6B (2025) to $80–100B by 2030. Benjamin Hindman, Andy Konwinski, Matei Zaharia, Ali Ghodsi, Anthony D. Joseph, Randy Katz, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. Mesos: A platform for fine-grained resource sharing in the data center. In Proceedings of the 8th USENIX Conference on Networked Sys-tems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’11) , pages 295–308. USENIX Association, 2011. Patrick Hunt, Mahadev Konar, Flavio P. Junqueira, and Benjamin Reed. ZooKeeper: Wait-free coordination for internet-scale systems. In Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’10) . USENIX Association, 2010. InfoWorld. Why context engineering will define the next era of enter-prise AI. InfoWorld, 2026. https://www.infoworld.com/article/4084378/ why-context-engineering-will-define-the-next-era-of-enterprise-ai.html .Leslie Lamport. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Com-munications of the ACM , 21(7):558–565, 1978. doi: 10.1145/359545.359563. LangChain. LangGraph: Build stateful multi-actor applications with LLMs. GitHub, 2025a. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph .LangChain. LangSmith: LLM application observability. LangChain, 2025b. https:// smith.langchain.com/ .Langfuse. Langfuse: Open-source LLM engineering platform. Langfuse, 2025. Acquired by ClickHouse, January 2026. Microsoft. Microsoft Copilot Studio: Fundamentals. Microsoft Learn, 2026. https://learn. microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot-studio/fundamentals-what-is-copilot-studio .24 CHARAFEDDINE MOUZOUNI 

Microsoft Research. AutoGen: A framework for building multi-agent conversational systems. GitHub, 2025. https://github.com/microsoft/autogen .Charafeddine Mouzouni. From Autonomous Agents to Accountable Systems: The Enterprise Playbook for High-Trust, High-ROI AI . Cohorte AI, 2025. October 2025. https://www. cohorte.co/playbooks/from-autonomous-agents-to-accountable-systems .Charafeddine Mouzouni. The Enterprise Agentic Platform: Architecture, Patterns, and the AI Operating System . Cohorte AI, 2026a. https://www.cohorte.co/playbooks/ the-enterprise-agentic-platform .Charafeddine Mouzouni. Mapping the exploitation surface: A 10,000-trial taxonomy of what makes LLM agents exploit vulnerabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04561 , 2026b. Charafeddine Mouzouni. Black-box reliability certification for AI agents via self-consistency sampling and conformal calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21368 , 2026c. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (AI RMF 1.0). Technical Report NIST AI 100-1, U.S. Department of Com-merce, 2023. Ikujiro Nonaka and Hirotaka Takeuchi. The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation . Oxford University Press, 1995. NVIDIA. NeMo guardrails. NVIDIA Developer, 2025. Open-source guardrails frame-work using Colang DSL. Neal Ramasamy. Context engineering will decide enterprise AI success. BigDATAwire / HPCwire, 2026. February 19, 2026. Cognizant CIO on the emergence of context engi-neering. Shaina Raza, Ranjan Sapkota, Manoj Karkee, and Christos Emmanouilidis. TRiSM for agentic AI: A review of trust, risk, and security management in LLM-based agentic multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04133 , 2025. Salesforce Architects. Enterprise agentic architecture. Salesforce Architects, 2026. https: //architect.salesforce.com/fundamentals/enterprise-agentic-architecture .Salesforce Engineering. Inside the brain of Agentforce: Revealing the Atlas reason-ing engine. Salesforce Engineering Blog, 2026. https://engineering.salesforce.com/ inside-the-brain-of-agentforce-revealing-the-atlas-reasoning-engine/ .Ravi S. Sandhu, Edward J. Coyne, Hal L. Feinstein, and Charles E. Youman. Role-based access control models. IEEE Computer , 29(2):38–47, 1996. doi: 10.1109/2.485845. Abhishek Verma, Luis Pedrosa, Madhukar Korupolu, David Oppenheimer, Eric Tune, and John Wilkes. Large-scale cluster management at Google with Borg. In Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’15) , pages 1–17. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2741948.2741964. Vera V. Vishnyakova. Context engineering: From prompts to corporate multi-agent ar-chitecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09619 , 2026. Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World . Springer, 2005. doi: 10.1007/b106715.