Title: Beyond Symbolic Solving: Multi Chain-of-Thought Voting for Geometric Reasoning in Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00890v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:04:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
Preprint. Under review. 

# Beyond Symbolic Solving: Multi Chain-of-Thought Voting for Geometric Reasoning in Large Language Models 

Md. Abu Bakor Siddique † Shahrin Hossain † Sadman Ahmed Siam †

Syed Rifat Raiyan ‡ Hasan Mahmud Md Kamrul Hasan 

Systems and Software Lab (SSL), Department of Computer Science and Engineering Islamic University of Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh 

> †

Equal contribution ‡Corresponding author: rifatraiyan@iut-dhaka.edu 

## Abstract 

Geometric Problem Solving (GPS) remains at the heart of enhancing math-ematical reasoning in large language models because it requires the com-bination of diagrammatic understanding, symbolic manipulation and log-ical inference. In existing literature, researchers have chiefly focused on synchronising the diagram descriptions with text literals and solving the problem. In this vein, they have either taken a neural, symbolic or neuro-symbolic approach. But this solves only the first two of the requirements, namely diagrammatic understanding and symbolic manipulation, while leaving logical inference underdeveloped. The logical inference is of-ten limited to one chain-of-thought (CoT). To address this weakness in hitherto existing models, this paper proposes MARS-GPS , that generates multiple parallel reasoning rollouts augmented with Python code execu-tion for numerical verification, ranks them using token-level entropy as a confidence signal, and aggregates answers through a multi-stage voting and self-verification pipeline. Empirical results show that MARS-GPS 

with 8 parallel rollouts achieves 88.8% on Geometry3K, a nearly +11% 

improvement over the prior state-of-the-art, with accuracy scaling con-sistently as the number of rollouts increases from 1 to 16 (+6.0% on abla-tion subset). We provide our code and data in an anonymous repository: 

https://anonymous.4open.science/r/MARS-GPS-DE55 .

## 1 Introduction 

Geometry Problem Solving is regarded as one of the pinnacles of human reasoning. In short, GPS takes a diagram and a textual description, and attempts to solve a problem. There are essentially two steps in solving the problem. Initial task is to identify the given knowledge base, i.e. , analysing the diagram and note down what is given. If the diagram does not contain enough information beyond the basic shapes, it is required that the diagram be annotated with proper information from textual description. The second task is to utilise the theorems to derive further conclusions. The prime difficulty in this case arises in identifying relevant theorems. For instance, Pythagoras’ theorem will not be applicable to circle-related problems. Some problems do not might not have an exclusive solution path, making matters complicated. Models such as Pi-GPS (Zhao et al., 2025), MINT-CoT (Chen et al., 2025), PGPSNet-v2 (Zhang et al., 2024a), G-LLaVA (Gao et al., 2025), etc., have attempted to perfect diagrammatic understanding, that is, the former part of the process. But, as we shall show, concentrating on logical inference through multiple Chain-of-Thoughts(CoTs) can significantly improve performance in GPS. Our contributions can be summarised as follows: • Showing that parallel rollout sampling outperforms symbolic solvers • Introducing a training-free confidence signal derived from per-token log probabili-ties at zero additional cost • An aggregation algorithm combining majority voting, entropy ranking, and Large Language Models self-verification • State-of-the-art results on Geometry3K and PGPS9K 1

> arXiv:2604.00890v1 [cs.AI] 1 Apr 2026

Preprint. Under review. 

## 2 Related Work 

Researchers in GPS have focused on a few specific approaches. Symbolic solvers such as InterGPS (Lu et al., 2021) attempt to solve the problem through logical manipulation. These systems are have limited scalability, motivating the development of neuro-symbolic solvers. Neuro-symbolic solvers such as PGPSNet (Zhang et al., 2023), PGPSNet-v2 (Zhang et al., 2024a), DualGeoSolver (Xiao et al., 2024), FormalGeo (Zhang et al., 2024b) mix both neural networks and symbolic solvers to solve the geometry problems. This approach is more scalable than purely symbolic systems., but due to difficulty handling complex reasoning chains and reliance on theorem sets, these models ultimately fail to get better at reasoning. Finally, Multimodal Large Language Models-based approaches such as G-LLaVA (Gao et al., 2025), GeoUni (Cheng et al., 2025) treat GPS as a multimodal reasoning task, ultimately suffering from the similar kind of unreliable reasoning. Most recent works include the likes of Zhao et al. (2025), who propose Pi-GPS that uses diagrams to disambiguate textual formal language via a rectifier-verifier micro module. This approach highlights the importance of diagram information in GPS, but relies on theorem sets provided. Similarly, Chen et al. (2025) propose MINT-CoT which interleaves fine-grained visual tokens into chain-of-thought reasoning steps via an Interleave Token mechanism. This approach highlights the benefits of visual grounding during reasoning, but the reasoning is still unreliable. Inference-time scaling is performance enhancement during inference. Balachandran et al. (2025) show that inference-time scaling can improve mathematical reasoning, but has less success with geometry as GPS requires more multimodal reasoning, and inference-time scaling remains more applicable in text-heavy setting. As this paper will show, their insight is also relevant for GPS. Benchmarks such as Geometry3k, MathVista, MathVerse, GeoEval are used to evaluate performance of the GPS systems. The problem sets need to be carefully selected so that both diagram and the text have equal significance, so that it can be checked how much they are being accurately parsed by the system and solved. 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We consider the standard geometry problem solving (GPS) setting: given a natural-language problem description T and an accompanying diagram image I, the goal is to generate the correct answer a ∈ A , where A = {A, B, C, D} represents the set of multiple-choice candidates. We use the structured representation from Pi-GPS (Zhao et al., 2025), where (T, I) is parsed into a set of first-order geometric predicates F (e.g. , Perpendicular (Line (B, D), Line (D, C)) ). We refer to the tuple (F , A) as the problem instance’s structured context .Our approach operates entirely at inference time which means no model weights are adjusted or fine-tuned. We use two axes to scale test-time computation. First, a frozen large language model fθ is given access to a code execution sandbox E which is a live Python kernel that runs code created by fθ in the middle of reasoning and injects the actual output back into its context. Second, we generate k independent solution attempts in parallel, each producing a candidate answer ˆam ∈ A ∪ { ∅}. The final answer ˆa is selected from 

{ ˆa1, . . . , ˆ ak} via a parallel voting strategy described in Section 3.4. 

3.2 Diagram Understanding and Parsing 

Since frontier MLLMs have difficulty extracting precise logical relationships directly from geometry diagrams, we translate both modalities through a two-stage parsing pipeline into a unified formal representation F ∗, which is used as input to our inference-time reasoning strategy (see Section 3.3). 2Preprint. Under review. Diagram 

Text 

> Find the
> area of the
> figure.

Semantic 

Parser 

PGDPNet 

Prompt 

> Text Logical
> Find(AreaOf(Tri-
> angle(A,B,D)))

Diagram Logical 

> PointLiesOnLine(C,Line
> (B, D)),
> Perpendicular(Line(A,
> C), Line(D, C)),
> Equals(LengthOf(Line(A,
> B)), 13),
> Equals(LengthOf(Line(A,
> D)), 13),

Entropy 

Analyzer 

Answer 

Aggregation  Answer 

> Reasoning Rollouts
> CoT
> 1
> CoT
> 2
> CoT
> 3
> CoT
> k
> CoT
> 4
> CoT
> 5

Problem Parsing 

Inference Time Reasoning 

Majority? 

Accept 

a* 

> YES

Filter Candidates 

If none, keep all 

Rank by 

Confidence 

Sort by H(a) 

ascending 

> NO

Self Verify? 

Weighted Fallback 

YES 

NO 

Answer Aggregation 

Code-Augmented Reasoning 

Prompt (P) 

> (& Formal Context F* )
> You are an expert geometry
> problem solver. You will
> receive a multiple-choice
> geometry problem. Solve step
> by step.....
> .. PROBLEM STATEMENT ..
> .. CHOICES A / B / C / D ..
> .. FORMAL CONTEXT ..
> .. SOLVING PROTOCOL ..

Full 

Reasoning 

Answer 

Only 

> Rollouts
> (r 1, r 2, r 3, ... , r k)

Python 

Sandbox (E)   

> i m por t mat h
> hal f _base=10/ 2
> hei ght =m at h.
> sqr t ( 13* * 2-
> hal f _base* * 2)
> pr i nt ( hei ght )
> Answer : 60

Answers 

(a 1, a 2, ..., a k)

Entropies 

(H 1, H 2, ..., H k)

Cancel Remaining Rollouts 

Figure 1: Overview of the Multi-path Aggregated Reasoning System for Geometry Problem 

Solving ( MARS-GPS ) pipeline. Left: the problem parsing stage takes the diagram and problem text as input and produces a unified formal context F ∗ via PGDPNet and a rule-based semantic parser. Right: the inference-time ensemble reasoning stage samples k parallel rollouts from fθ , each augmented with a Python sandbox E for numerical computation. The rollout outputs feed into the answer aggregation pipeline, which applies majority voting, entropy-ranked self-verification, and a weighted fallback to produce the final answer a∗.

Text Parser. The text parser applies a rule-based regular-expression pipeline to T, producing formal literals FT such as Find (AreaOf (Triangle (A, B, C))) or 

Equals (LengthOf (Line (A, B)) , 13 ). We prefer this design over neural alternatives because geometry datasets are relatively small, and the downstream reasoning stage is highly sensi-tive to malformed formalizations. Empirically, the rule-based parser achieves 97% accuracy, compared with 67% for a BART-based baseline (Lu et al., 2021). 

Diagram Parser. The diagram I is processed with PGDPNet (Zhang et al., 2022), which extracts geometric primitives and their relations as formal literals FD (e.g. ,

PointLiesOnLine (D, Line (B, C)) , Equals (LengthOf (Line (A, B)) , 5 )). The final representation F ∗ merges text literals FT and diagram literals FD into a unified structured description of each problem and serves as the only input passed to fθ at inference time. 

3.3 Inference-Time Reasoning Strategy 

Prior neural-symbolic approaches to GPS invest their computation budget at training time, learning theorem predictors (Lu et al., 2021), reinforcement-trained search policies (Peng et al., 2023), or fine-tuned multimodal encoders (Zhang et al., 2023). At inference time, these methods commit to a single reasoning path: one symbolic execution, one answer. This single-path paradigm is a wrong step which propagates irrecoverably to an incorrect answer. We take a different approach. Rather than relying on a deterministic symbolic solver, we use fθ (GPT-OSS 120B, served via VLMs (Kwon et al., 2023)) to reason directly over F ∗,and instead of committing to a single trace, we sample k independent reasoning rollouts in parallel and aggregate their outputs using a confidence-aware selection strategy. The three components of this approach are described below: parallel rollout sampling (Section 3.3.1), confidence estimation via token entropy (Section 3.3.2), and code-augmented reasoning (Section 3.3.3). 3Preprint. Under review. 

3.3.1 Parallel Rollout Sampling 

Given F ∗, we construct a structured prompt P with a system prompt instructing fθ to output 

\boxed{N} where N ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4 }, and a user prompt containing T, A, and F ∗. The raw image 

I is never passed to fθ as all visual information is already encoded in F ∗.We sample k independent rollouts in parallel: 

{r1, r2, . . . , rk} ∼ fθ (P | F ∗) (1) Each rollout ri is a complete chain-of-thought trace terminating with a boxed answer ai,extracted via pattern matching on \boxed{N} . Rollouts with no extractable answer are excluded from aggregation. The k rollouts run concurrently via a thread pool of 16 workers, with VLMs’ PagedAttention batching all requests in a single forward pass making wall-clock time for k = 8 only marginally greater than k = 1. Each problem has a maximum budget of 900 seconds (Wang et al., 2023). 

3.3.2 Confidence Estimation via Token Entropy 

VLMs return per-token log probabilities ℓt,j = log pθ (wj | w<t) at no additional cost. At each token position t in rollout ri, we compute Shannon entropy over the top-v vocabulary entries: 

Ht = − ∑

> j

eℓt,j · log 2



eℓt,j



(2) and aggregate into a per-rollout mean entropy: ¯Hi = 1

TiTi

# ∑

> t=1

Ht (3) ¯Hi serves as an inverse confidence score which means lower is more confident. It is used to break vote ties and to rank candidates for self-verification, ensuring the most confident answer is verified first (Section 3.4). 

3.3.3 Code-Augmented Reasoning 

Geometry problems often require precise numerical computation that Large Language Models handle unreliably through pure token generation (Wang et al., 2024). Each rollout ri

is therefore paired with a sandbox instance E:

ri = fθ (P, E ), E : code 7 → output (4) When fθ writes a Python code block mid-reasoning, it is executed in E and the output is injected back into context. We maintain a pool of 16 persistent E instances to avoid kernel startup overhead while keeping rollouts isolated. In practice, near 40% of rollouts invoke E at least once, with usage concentrated on computationally intensive problems requiring precise numerical calculation. The full procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1 (see Appendix A). 

3.4 Verification and Self-Consistency 

Having generated k rollouts with answers {ai}ki=1 and confidence scores { ¯Hi}ki=1, the re-maining challenge is to reliably pick the correct answer from this pool. Naïve majority voting is a natural baseline, but it treats all rollouts as equally trustworthy. We instead use a six-step procedure that progressively filters candidates using vote counts, entropy scores, and self-verification, falling back to weighted scoring only when stronger signals are unavailable. 

Step 1: Early Consensus. We first check whether any answer appears in k/ 2 + 1 or more of the k rollouts. If so, we accept it immediately: if 

> k

# ∑

> i=1

1[ai = a] ≥ k/2 + 1 ⇒ a∗ = a (5) 4Preprint. Under review. Near-unanimous agreement across independent rollouts is a strong correctness signal, and this early exit avoids spending verification budget on easy cases. 

Step 2: Hard Accept. If no answer reaches ⌈k/ 2⌉ + 1 votes, we check for a weaker consen-sus of ⌈k/ 2⌉ or more. For example: an answer supported by four of eight rollouts constitutes an absolute majority and is accepted directly. In case of a tie, we move on to step 3. 

Step 3: Candidate Selection. If neither condition is met, we collect the candidate answers or those appearing in k/4 or more rollouts: 

Acand =

(

a

> k

# ∑

> i=1

1[ai = a] ≥ ⌈ k/4 ⌉

)

(6) Single-rollout answers are treated as outliers and discarded. If Acand is empty (all answers are singletons), all four choices are retained. 

Step 4: Entropy-Ranked Verification. For each candidate a ∈ A cand , we compute its mean support entropy across the rollouts that produced it: ¯H(a) = 1

|I a| ∑

> i∈I a

¯Hi, Ia = {i : ai = a} (7) Candidates are sorted in ascending order of ¯H(a), most confident first and submitted to self-verification in this order. Verifying the most confident candidate first is efficient: if it passes, we stop without querying the model for remaining candidates. 

Step 5: Large Language Models Self-Verification. For each candidate a (in entropy-ranked order), we query fθ at temperature τ = 0 with a structured verification prompt asking whether the proposed answer is CORRECT or WRONG . The deterministic setting ensures stable, reproducible decisions. If fθ responds CORRECT , we accept a as a∗ and terminate; if 

WRONG , we move to the next candidate. This step exploits the model’s own reasoning to cross-check candidates against F ∗, without requiring a separately trained verifier. 

Step 6: Weighted Fallback. If all candidates are rejected, we fall back to a scoring function combining vote count and confidence: 

a∗ = arg max 

> a∈A cand

λ · votes (a) − (1 − λ) · ¯H(a) (8) where ¯H(a) is subtracted because lower entropy should be rewarded. This fallback is triggered in fewer than 8% of problems, indicating that earlier steps resolve the vast majority of cases. The full aggregation procedure is detailed in Algorithm 2 (see Appendix A). 

3.5 Full Pipeline Summary 

Figure 1 illustrates the complete system. Our approach decomposes GPS into two sequential stages with a clean interface between them. 

Stage 1 — Problem Parsing (Section 3.2) takes the raw problem (T, I) as input and produces the formal representation F ∗. This stage involves two components: a rule-based text parser producing FT , and the PGDPNet diagram parser producing FD. All visual understanding happens here, the raw image I is never forwarded to the reasoning model. 

Stage 2 — Inference-Time Ensemble Reasoning (Sections 3.3–3.4) takes F ∗ as input and pro-duces the final answer a∗. This is our primary contribution, consisting of three components: parallel rollout sampling from the frozen fθ , per-rollout confidence estimation via token entropy, and confidence-aware aggregation with Large Language Models self-verification. We refer to our full system as MARS-GPS . Table 1 reports results against all prior neural-symbolic baselines on Geometry3K and PGPS9K. 5Preprint. Under review. 

## 4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

We have run the experiments on Geomety3k and PGPS9K datasets. Geometry3K is made of 3002 geometric problems. It has 3 splits. There are 2101 problems to train, 300 problems is used for validation and finally 601 datapoints for testing purpose. Each of the data points have a problem statement, geometric diagram, and formal language parsing annotaions. PGPS9K is an expanded version of Geometry3K that contains 9022 datapoints. It has 4000 unique diagrams. Of these, 2891 problems are taken directly from the Geometry3K dataset and the rest are from high school text books. Collectively, they cover almost all types of plane geometry problems that can be found in high school textbooks. 

4.2 Baselines 

We are using GPT-OSS (120B) (OpenAI et al., 2025) at the heart of our pipeline. We also used state of the art AI models and analyze their performance in geometry problem solving as detailed below. 

Neural Methods. We use NGS (Chen et al., 2021), which encodes diagrams with ResNet-101, Geoformer (Chen et al., 2022), which uses VL-T5 for diagram encoding, SCA-GPS (Ning et al., 2023), a symbolic-character-aware model, GOLD (Zhang & Moshfeghi, 2024), which converts diagrams to natural language descriptions, PGPSNet-v2-S (Zhang et al., 2024a), which combines CNN and GRU encoders with a fuse-reason-verify pipeline, and LANS (Li et al., 2024), a layout-aware neural solver that relies on ground-truth diagram annotations. 

Neural-Symbolic Methods. We compare against Inter-GPS (Lu et al., 2021), which parses problems into formal language and applies symbolic theorem search, GeoDRL (Peng et al., 2023), which extends Inter-GPS with reinforcement learning for theorem prediction, E-GPS (Wu et al., 2024), which combines top-down solving with bottom-up program generation, and Pi-GPS (Zhao et al., 2025), which uses a rectifier-verifier module to disambiguate text using diagram information. 

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). For MLLMs evaluated as direct multi-modal solvers, we include GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024), Gemini 2 (Google Gemini Team, 2023), Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024) and Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023), all processing both problem text and diagrams end-to-end. 

Proprietary Large Language Models. We additionally compare against proprietary Large Language Models evaluated on parsed formal representations: GPT-5 (OpenAI Team, 2025), GPT-5.2 (Zhang et al., 2026) and Claude 4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic Team, 2025). Results are reported in Table 1. All results are reported using top-1 accuracy: the percentage of problems for which the system’s final answer matches the ground-truth label. Since both benchmarks are multiple-choice, this is equivalent to exact-match accuracy over A = {A, B, C, D}.

## 5 Results 

5.1 Main Results 

We have put our results comparing with other baselines in table 1. We can see that MARS-GPS consistently outperforms all other benchlines on Geometry3k dataset by a significant margine. Even in the cases where the Multimodal Large Language Models have apparent better performance, they lack precision with geometric nuances. The table captures this phenomenon. Generalized Large Language Models face difficulty in accurately parsing precise geometric figures and computing values embedded in them accurately, such as the length of a side of a square or value of degree in a triangle. Our method yields higher 6Preprint. Under review. 

Category Method Geometry3K PGPS9K 

MLLMs Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023) 26.7 23.2 GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) 58.6 51.0 Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024) 56.4 45.9 Gemini 2 (Google Gemini Team, 2023) 60.7 56.8 Proprietary LLMs GPT-5 (OpenAI Team, 2025) 61.5 –GPT-5.2 (Zhang et al., 2026) 73.1 –Claude 4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic Team, 2025) 75.8 –Neural Methods NGS (Chen et al., 2021) 58.8 46.1 Geoformer (Chen et al., 2022) 59.3 47.3 SCA-GPS (Ning et al., 2023) 76.7 –GOLD ∗ (Zhang & Moshfeghi, 2024) 62.7 60.6 PGPSNet-v2-S ∗ (Zhang et al., 2024a) 76.4 69.2 LANS (Diagram GT) ∗ (Li et al., 2024) 82.3 74.0 Neural-symbolic Methods Inter-GPS (Lu et al., 2021) 57.5 –GeoDRL (Peng et al., 2023) 68.4 66.7 E-GPS (Wu et al., 2024) 67.9 –Pi-GPS (Zhao et al., 2025) 77.8 69.8 

MARS-GPS (ours) 88.8 77.48 

Table 1: Comparison on Geometry3K and PGPS9K. Best results in bold . ∗ indicates models trained on the larger PGPS9K dataset. accuracy by leveraging superior reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models while using a dedicated diagram parser and correction methods. Against Neural-symbolic Methods, our model has an notable 11% improvement over frontier works like PI-GPS and an even more noteworthy 30% over pioneering works like Inter-GPS in this domain. These results effectively solidify our claim that using superior reasoning capabilites of Large Language Models yield better results than using rule based Neuro-symbolic approach. We present comparisons on PGPS9k dataset to further solidify the effectiveness of our method. MARS-GPS achieves 77.48% accuracy which is nearly 8% higher than PI-GPS and over 20% more than general purpose Multimodal Large Language Models. These results demonstrate the comprehensive nature of our pipeline and robustness against different types of geometric problems. We have also presented comparisons against top performing Neural models, Notably LANS, which was trained on larger PGPS9K dataset. It achieves 82% accuracy thanks to its superior focus in diagram parsing and ground truth annotations on train data. However, it still gets outperformed by MARS-GPS. 

5.2 Ablation Studies Voting Strategies We compare three voting strategies for aggregating predictions across sampled reasoning chains. Majority voting (Wang et al., 2023) selects the most frequently occurring answer and achieves an accuracy of 85.5% on our evaluation set. Entropy sorting ranks candidate answers by their mean token entropy and selects the lowest-entropy predic-tion, also yielding 85.5%. Entropy-weighted voting extends majority voting by weighting each candidate answer by the inverse of its entropy, thereby down-weighting uncertain pre-dictions; this strategy achieves the highest accuracy of 87.5%, outperforming both baselines by 2 percentage points (see Figure 2a). Based on these results, entropy-weighted voting is used as the default aggregation strategy in MARS-GPS. 7Preprint. Under review.  

> Majority Voting
> Entropy Sorting
> Entropy Weighted Voting
> 82
> 84
> 86
> 88
> 90
> 85.5 %85.5 %
> 87.5 %
> Accuracy (%)

Accuracy vs. Voting Strategy 

(a) Accuracy by voting strategy.  

> MARS-GPS w/o Code Augmentation
> w/o Self Verification
> 80
> 82
> 84
> 86
> 88
> 90
> 87.5 %
> 85.0 %
> 83.0 %
> Accuracy (%)

Component Ablation 

(b) Component ablation. 

Figure 2: Ablation studies on a subset of Geometry3K. (a) Entropy-weighted voting out-performs majority voting and entropy sorting by 2.0 percentage points. (b) Removing self-verification causes the largest single-component accuracy drop ( −4.5pp), followed by code augmentation ( −2.5pp). 

Code-augmented reasoning. We augment each reasoning rollout with access to a sandboxed Python executor, allowing the model to offload precise numerical computation and reducing arithmetic hallucinations (Wang et al., 2024). Removing code augmentation drops accuracy from 87.5% to 85.0% (Figure 2b), a 2.5 percentage point decrease. We observe that 42% of all CoT rollouts invoke code execution at least once; among those rollouts, denying code access causes accuracy to fall to 75%, indicating that the problems requiring computation are disproportionately harder and benefit most from symbolic verification. Detailed per-problem breakdown is provided in Appendix E. 

Self-verification. The self-verification stage prompts the model to re-examine its solution for logical consistency before committing to a final answer. As shown in Figure 2b, removing self-verification reduces accuracy from 87.5% to 83.0%. It is a 4.5 percentage point performance drop, the largest single-component degradation. This confirms that self-verification acts as an effective post-hoc filter, catching theorem misapplications and cascading calculation errors that survive the initial reasoning pass. 1 2 4 8 16 

> Number of CoT Samples
> 81
> 82
> 83
> 84
> 85
> 86
> 87
> 88
> 89
> Accuracy (%)
> Accuracy vs. Number of CoT Samples

Figure 3: Accuracy vs. number of CoT samples. 

Accuracy vs. number of CoT samples. To establish the relationship between accuracy gain and the num-ber of CoTs, we ran tests for k ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 } CoT samples on Geometry3K. As shown in Figure 3, accu-racy increases log-linearly with the number of sam-ples, rising from 82.0% ( k=1) to 88.0% ( k=16), consis-tent with the log-linear scaling behaviour observed in self-consistency decoding (Wang et al., 2023). We observe diminishing returns between k=8 and k=16, where doubling the compute budget yields only a 0.5 percentage point improvement. Based on this, the main experiments use k=8 to balance accuracy and computational overhead. Detailed per-k results are provided in Appendix B. 

Note: We conduct ablation experiments on a randomly sampled subset of Geometry3K to isolate the contribution of each pipeline component. Unless stated otherwise, all ablations use k=8 rollouts with entropy-weighted voting. 

8Preprint. Under review. 

## 6 Analysis and Discussion 

Error Analysis. We inspected incorrectly answered problems from the Geometry3K test set to identify failure modes. The hardest category turns out to be area-based problems with 77.4% accuracy. This result is consistent with Pi-GPS findings on area ambiguity. The second hardest category is the determination of length/other parameters with 85.6%. Other categories such as trigonometry, circle, angle and quadrilateral problems don’t pose much difficulty to the system. Another point to note is that the wrong predictions take almost 4.2 times more execution time than correct ones, as can be seen from the table 5 of Appendix E. The probable reason is because the rollouts disagree, entropy is high, and the system exhausts the verification steps before falling back. Circle and Length/Other problems take the longest time before predicting wrong answers. This means that the system spends its full verification budget on these cases before falling back, as shown in the table 7 of the Appendix E. 

When Does Inference-Time Scaling Help? Parallel rollout sampling provides the largest gains on problems of moderate difficulty those requiring 3–5 reasoning steps. On simple problems (1–2 steps), a single rollout already succeeds, so additional samples add little. On the hardest problems (6+ steps, auxiliary constructions), all rollouts tend to fail in similar ways, and voting cannot recover from a systematically wrong approach. This pattern is consistent with observations by Balachandran et al. (2025) on other mathematical domains, and suggests that combining inference-time scaling with training-time improvements to the reasoning model could push accuracy further on the hardest tier. 

Limitations. Our approach inherits the limitations of its parsing stage: problems where PGDPNet produces an incomplete or incorrect F ∗ cannot be recovered by downstream reasoning, regardless of how many rollouts are sampled. Additionally, the computational cost scales linearly with k; while VLMs’ batching makes this practically efficient, it still represents a k-fold increase in token generation over a single-pass baseline. Finally, MARS-GPS is currently limited to multiple-choice geometry problems and has not been evaluated on open-ended or proof-based tasks. This might be a potential avenue for researchers working in the autoformalisation domain, to combine these strategies in proving theorems using lean or CoT. 

## 7 Future Work 

Looking ahead, there are several promising directions. First, improving the diagram parsing stage, either through better neural parsers or by incorporating Multimodal Large Language Models directly into parsing, could address the largest single source of errors. Second, combining inference-time scaling with training-time improvements, such as fine-tuning fθ

on geometry-specific data, may yield compounding gains. Third, extending the framework to open-ended geometry problems and formal theorem proving would broaden its applica-bility. Finally, adaptive rollout budgets or sampling fewer rollouts for easy problems and more for hard ones could reduce computational cost without sacrificing accuracy. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose MARS-GPS, an inference-time framework for geometry prob-lem solving. It generates multiple parallel reasoning rollouts, estimates their confidence through token-level entropy, and finally aggregates answers via a multi-stage voting and self-verification pipeline. Without any training or fine-tuning, MARS-GPS achieves 88.8% 

on Geometry3K and 77.5% on PGPS9K, outperforming the existing approaches. Our abla-tion studies confirm that accuracy scales log-linearly with the number of rollouts and that entropy-weighted voting is the most effective aggregation strategy. 9Preprint. Under review. 

## References 

Anthropic. Claude 3.5 sonnet. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet ,2024. Anthropic Team. Claude 4.5 model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19773 , 2025. Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localization, text reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966 , 2023. Vidhisha Balachandran, Jingya Chen, Lingjiao Chen, Shivam Garg, Neel Joshi, Yash Lara, John Langford, Besmira Nushi, Vibhav Vineet, Yue Wu, and Safoora Yousefi. Inference-time scaling for complex tasks: Where we stand and what lies ahead. CoRR ,abs/2504.00294, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.00294. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2504.00294 .Jiaqi Chen, Jianheng Tang, Jinghui Qin, Xiaodan Liang, Lingbo Liu, Eric Xing, and Liang Lin. Geoqa: A geometric question answering benchmark towards multimodal numerical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 ,pp. 513–523, 2021. Jiaqi Chen, Tong Li, Jinghui Qin, Pan Lu, Liang Lin, Chongyu Chen, and Xiaodan Liang. Unigeo: Unifying geometry logical reasoning via reformulating mathematical expression. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pp. 3313–3323, 2022. Xinyan Chen, Renrui Zhang, Dongzhi Jiang, Aojun Zhou, Shilin Yan, Weifeng Lin, and Hongsheng Li. Mint-cot: Enabling interleaved visual tokens in mathematical chain-of-thought reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05331 .Jo-Ku Cheng, Zeren Zhang, Ran Chen, Jingyang Deng, Ziran Qin, and Jinwen Ma. Geouni: A unified model for generating geometry diagrams, problems and problem solutions, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10146 .Jiahui Gao, Renjie Pi, Jipeng Zhang, Jiacheng Ye, Wanjun Zhong, Yufei Wang, Lanqing Hong, Jianhua Han, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. G-llava: Solving geometric problem with multi-modal large language model, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2312.11370 .Google Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’23, pp. 611–626, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400702297. doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613165. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3600006.3613165 .Zhong-Zhi Li, Ming-Liang Zhang, Fei Yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Lans: A layout-aware neural solver for plane geometry problem. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pp. 2596–2608, 2024. Pan Lu, Ran Gong, Shibiao Jiang, Liang Qiu, Siyuan Huang, Xiaodan Liang, and Song-Chun Zhu. Inter-gps: Interpretable geometry problem solving with formal language and symbolic reasoning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04165 .Maizhen Ning, Qiu-Feng Wang, Kaizhu Huang, and Xiaowei Huang. A symbolic characters aware model for solving geometry problems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 7767–7775, 2023. 10 Preprint. Under review. OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛ adry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Alex Renzin, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Kirillov, Alexi Christakis, Alexis Conneau, Ali Kamali, Allan Jabri, Allison Moyer, Allison Tam, Amadou Crookes, Amin Tootoochian, Amin Tootoonchian, Ananya Kumar, Andrea Vallone, An-drej Karpathy, Andrew Braunstein, Andrew Cann, Andrew Codispoti, Andrew Galu, Andrew Kondrich, Andrew Tulloch, Andrey Mishchenko, Angela Baek, Angela Jiang, Antoine Pelisse, Antonia Woodford, Anuj Gosalia, Arka Dhar, Ashley Pantuliano, Avi Nayak, Avital Oliver, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben Leimberger, Ben Rossen, Ben Sokolowsky, Ben Wang, Benjamin Zweig, Beth Hoover, Blake Samic, Bob McGrew, Bobby Spero, Bogo Giertler, Bowen Cheng, Brad Lightcap, Brandon Walkin, Brendan Quinn, Brian Guarraci, Brian Hsu, Bright Kellogg, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi, Carroll Wainwright, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Casey Chu, Chad Nelson, Chak Li, Chan Jun Shern, Channing Conger, Charlotte Barette, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Cheng Lu, Chong Zhang, Chris Beaumont, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Christian Gibson, Christina Kim, Christine Choi, Christine McLeavey, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clemens Win-ter, Coley Czarnecki, Colin Jarvis, Colin Wei, Constantin Koumouzelis, Dane Sherburn, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levin, Daniel Levy, David Carr, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, David Sasaki, Denny Jin, Dev Valladares, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Duc Phong Nguyen, Duncan Findlay, Edede Oiwoh, Edmund Wong, Ehsan Asdar, Elizabeth Proehl, Elizabeth Yang, Eric Antonow, Eric Kramer, Eric Peterson, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Eugene Brevdo, Evan Mays, Farzad Khorasani, Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Francis Zhang, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Gabriel Goh, Gene Oden, Geoff Salmon, Giulio Starace, Greg Brockman, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Haitang Hu, Hannah Wong, Haoyu Wang, Heather Schmidt, Heather Whitney, Heewoo Jun, Hendrik Kirchner, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Hongyu Ren, Huiwen Chang, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Okuyucu, Ikai Lan, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jacob Coxon, Jacob Menick, Jakub Pachocki, James Aung, James Betker, James Crooks, James Lennon, Jamie Kiros, Jan Leike, Jane Park, Jason Kwon, Jason Phang, Jason Teplitz, Jason Wei, Jason Wolfe, Jay Chen, Jeff Harris, Jenia Varavva, Jessica Gan Lee, Jessica Shieh, Ji Lin, Jiahui Yu, Jiayi Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joanne Jang, Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Joe Beutler, Joe Landers, Joel Parish, Johannes Heidecke, John Schulman, Jonathan Lachman, Jonathan McKay, Jonathan Uesato, Jonathan Ward, Jong Wook Kim, Joost Huizinga, Jordan Sitkin, Jos Kraaijeveld, Josh Gross, Josh Kaplan, Josh Snyder, Joshua Achiam, Joy Jiao, Joyce Lee, Juntang Zhuang, Justyn Harriman, Kai Fricke, Kai Hayashi, Karan Singhal, Katy Shi, Kavin Karthik, Kayla Wood, Kendra Rimbach, Kenny Hsu, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Button, Kevin Liu, Kiel Howe, Krithika Muthukumar, Kyle Luther, Lama Ahmad, Larry Kai, Lauren Itow, Lauren Workman, Leher Pathak, Leo Chen, Li Jing, Lia Guy, Liam Fedus, Liang Zhou, Lien Mamitsuka, Lilian Weng, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Long Ouyang, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lukas Kondraciuk, Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Hewitt, Luke Metz, Lyric Doshi, Mada Aflak, Maddie Simens, Madelaine Boyd, Madeleine Thompson, Marat Dukhan, Mark Chen, Mark Gray, Mark Hudnall, Marvin Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Mateusz Litwin, Matthew Zeng, Max Johnson, Maya Shetty, Mayank Gupta, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz, Meng Jia Yang, Mengchao Zhong, Mia Glaese, Mianna Chen, Michael Janner, Michael Lampe, Michael Petrov, Michael Wu, Michele Wang, Michelle Fradin, Michelle Pokrass, Miguel Castro, Miguel Oom Temudo de Castro, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Brundage, Miles Wang, Minal Khan, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Murat Yesildal, Nacho Soto, Natalia Gimelshein, Natalie Cone, Natalie Staudacher, Natalie Summers, Natan LaFontaine, Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nick Stathas, Nick Turley, Nik Tezak, Niko Felix, Nithanth Kudige, Nitish Keskar, Noah Deutsch, Noel Bundick, Nora Puckett, Ofir Nachum, Ola Okelola, Oleg Boiko, Oleg Murk, Oliver Jaffe, Olivia Watkins, Olivier Godement, Owen Campbell-Moore, Patrick Chao, Paul McMillan, Pavel Belov, Peng Su, Peter Bak, Peter Bakkum, Peter Deng, Peter Dolan, Peter Hoeschele, Peter Welinder, Phil Tillet, Philip Pronin, Philippe Tillet, Prafulla Dhariwal, Qiming Yuan, Rachel Dias, Rachel Lim, Rahul Arora, Rajan Troll, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Raul Puri, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renaud Gaubert, Reza Zamani, Ricky Wang, Rob Donnelly, Rob Honsby, Rocky Smith, Rohan Sahai, Rohit 11 Preprint. Under review. Ramchandani, Romain Huet, Rory Carmichael, Rowan Zellers, Roy Chen, Ruby Chen, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Ryan Cheu, Saachi Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Schoenholz, Sam Toizer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sara Culver, Scott Ethersmith, Scott Gray, Sean Grove, Sean Metzger, Shamez Hermani, Shantanu Jain, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shino Jomoto, Shirong Wu, Shuaiqi, Xia, Sonia Phene, Spencer Papay, Srinivas Narayanan, Steve Coffey, Steve Lee, Stewart Hall, Suchir Balaji, Tal Broda, Tal Stramer, Tao Xu, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas Cunninghman, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Thomas Raoux, Thomas Shadwell, Tianhao Zheng, Todd Underwood, Todor Markov, Toki Sherbakov, Tom Rubin, Tom Stasi, Tomer Kaftan, Tristan Heywood, Troy Peterson, Tyce Walters, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Veit Moeller, Vinnie Monaco, Vishal Kuo, Vlad Fomenko, Wayne Chang, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wesam Manassra, Will Sheu, Wojciech Zaremba, Yash Patil, Yilei Qian, Yongjik Kim, Youlong Cheng, Yu Zhang, Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yujia Jin, Yunxing Dai, and Yury Malkov. Gpt-4o system card, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276 .OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, Che Chang, Kai Chen, Mark Chen, Enoch Cheung, Aidan Clark, Dan Cook, Marat Dukhan, Casey Dvorak, Kevin Fives, Vlad Fomenko, Timur Garipov, Kristian Georgiev, Mia Glaese, Tarun Gogineni, Adam Goucher, Lukas Gross, Katia Gil Guzman, John Hallman, Jackie Hehir, Johannes Heidecke, Alec Helyar, Haitang Hu, Romain Huet, Jacob Huh, Saachi Jain, Zach Johnson, Chris Koch, Irina Kofman, Dominik Kundel, Jason Kwon, Volodymyr Kyrylov, Elaine Ya Le, Guillaume Leclerc, James Park Lennon, Scott Lessans, Mario Lezcano-Casado, Yuanzhi Li, Zhuohan Li, Ji Lin, Jordan Liss, Lily, Liu, Jiancheng Liu, Kevin Lu, Chris Lu, Zoran Martinovic, Lindsay McCallum, Josh McGrath, Scott McKinney, Aidan McLaughlin, Song Mei, Steve Mostovoy, Tong Mu, Gideon Myles, Alexander Neitz, Alex Nichol, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Dana Palmie, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Jongsoo Park, Leher Pathak, Carolina Paz, Ludovic Peran, Dmitry Pimenov, Michelle Pokrass, Elizabeth Proehl, Huida Qiu, Gaby Raila, Filippo Raso, Hongyu Ren, Kimmy Richardson, David Robinson, Bob Rotsted, Hadi Salman, Suvansh Sanjeev, Max Schwarzer, D. Sculley, Harshit Sikchi, Kendal Simon, Karan Singhal, Yang Song, Dane Stuckey, Zhiqing Sun, Philippe Tillet, Sam Toizer, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Nikhil Vyas, Eric Wallace, Xin Wang, Miles Wang, Olivia Watkins, Kevin Weil, Amy Wendling, Kevin Whinnery, Cedric Whitney, Hannah Wong, Lin Yang, Yu Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Kristen Ying, Wojciech Zaremba, Wenting Zhan, Cyril Zhang, Brian Zhang, Eddie Zhang, and Shengjia Zhao. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925 .OpenAI Team. Gpt-5 technical report. arXiv preprint , 2025. Shuai Peng, Di Fu, Yijun Liang, Liangcai Gao, and Zhi Tang. Geodrl: A self-learning framework for geometry problem solving using reinforcement learning in deductive reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 13468– 13480, 2023. Ke Wang, Houxing Ren, Aojun Zhou, Zimu Lu, Sichun Luo, Weikang Shi, Renrui Zhang, Linqi Song, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. Mathcoder: Seamless code integration in LLMs for enhanced mathematical reasoning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=z8TW0ttBPp .Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. Wenjun Wu, Lingling Zhang, Jun Liu, Xi Tang, Yaxian Wang, Shaowei Wang, and Qianying Wang. E-gps: Explainable geometry problem solving via top-down solver and bottom-up generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 13828–13837, 2024. 12 Preprint. Under review. Tong Xiao, Jiayu Liu, Zhenya Huang, Jinze Wu, Jing Sha, Shijin Wang, and Enhong Chen. Learning to solve geometry problems via simulating human dual-reasoning process, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.06232 .Jiaxin Zhang and Yashar Moshfeghi. Gold: Geometry problem solver with natural language description. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pp. 263–278, 2024. Ming-Liang Zhang, Fei Yin, Yi-Han Hao, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Plane geometry diagram parsing. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22 , pp. 1636–1643, 7 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/228. Ming-Liang Zhang, Fei yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. A multi-modal neural geometric solver with textual clauses parsed from diagram. In Edith Elkind (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23 , pp. 3374–3382. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2023. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2023/ 376. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/376 . Main Track. Ming-Liang Zhang, Zhong-Zhi Li, Fei Yin, Liang Lin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Fuse, reason and verify: Geometry problem solving with parsed clauses from diagram, 2024a. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07327 .S. Zhang et al. Prior-guided multi-step theorem prediction via theorem precedence graphs. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04852 , 2026. Xiaokai Zhang, Na Zhu, Yiming He, Jia Zou, Qike Huang, Xiaoxiao Jin, Yanjun Guo, Chenyang Mao, Yang Li, Zhe Zhu, Dengfeng Yue, Fangzhen Zhu, Yifan Wang, Yiwen Huang, Runan Wang, Cheng Qin, Zhenbing Zeng, Shaorong Xie, Xiangfeng Luo, and Tuo Leng. Formalgeo: An extensible formalized framework for olympiad geometric problem solving, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18021 .Junbo Zhao, Ting Zhang, Jiayu Sun, Mi Tian, and Hua Huang. Pi-gps: Enhancing geometry problem solving by unleashing the power of diagrammatic information. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 1526–1536, October 2025. 

## Reproducibility Statement 

All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. 

Datasets. We evaluate on G EOMETRY 3K (Lu et al., 2021), a benchmark of 3,002 multiple-choice plane geometry problems drawn from textbooks, and PGPS9K (Zhang et al., 2024a), an expanded set of 9,022 problems sharing 2,891 problems with G EOMETRY 3K and adding further high-school textbook problems across 4,000 unique diagrams. Both datasets must be downloaded prior to running the pipeline; download instructions are provided in the repository README. 

Code. Our implementation draws major inspiration from ? for the overall coding setup and inference pipeline structure. The full source code, including the parallel rollout sampler, entropy estimation, sandbox execution, and aggregation pipeline, is available at: 

https://anonymous.4open.science/r/MARS-GPS-DE55 

Please refer to the README for detailed setup and reproduction instructions. 13 Preprint. Under review. 

## A Algorithms 

Algorithm 1 Inference-Time Reasoning with Parallel Rollouts 

Require: Disambiguated formal representation F ∗, model fθ , number of rollouts k, time budget B

Ensure: Final answer a∗ 

> 1:

Construct prompt P from F ∗ 

> 2:

Initialize thread pool (16 workers) and kernel pool (16 Jupyter sandboxes)  

> 3:

for i = 1 to k in parallel do  

> 4:

ri ← fθ (P, τ=1.0, min-p=0.02 ) ▷ stream tokens with logprobs  

> 5:

ai ← EXTRACT ANSWER (ri) ▷ parse \boxed{N} or fallback pattern  

> 6:

¯Hi ← MEAN ENTROPY (ri) ▷ Eq. 3  

> 7:

if code block detected in ri then  

> 8:

Execute in sandbox; inject output into context  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

a∗ ← AGGREGATE AND VERIFY ({ai}, { ¯Hi}) ▷ Algorithm 2  

> 12:

return a∗

Algorithm 2 Confidence-Aware Answer Aggregation 

Require: Answers {ai}ki=1, entropies { ¯Hi}ki=1, model fθ , problem context F ∗

Ensure: Final answer a∗ 

> 1:

if ∃ a : votes (a) ≥ (k/2 ) + 1 then  

> 2:

return a ▷ Step 1: early consensus  

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

if ∃ a : votes (a) ≥ (k/2 ) then  

> 5:

return a ▷ Step 2: hard accept  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Acand ← { a : votes (a) ≥ (k/4 )} 

> 8:

if Acand = ∅ then  

> 9:

Acand ← { 1, 2, 3, 4 } 

> 10:

end if ▷ Step 3: candidate selection  

> 11:

Sort Acand by ¯ H(a) ascending ▷ Step 4: entropy ranking  

> 12:

for each a ∈ A cand (sorted) do  

> 13:

v ← fθ (VerifyPrompt (a, F ∗), τ=0) ▷ Step 5: self-verification  

> 14:

if v = CORRECT then  

> 15:

return a 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

return arg max a λ · votes (a) − (1−λ) · ¯H(a) ▷ Step 6: weighted fallback 14 Preprint. Under review. 

## B CoT Scaling Results 

Table 2 reports accuracy on Geometry3K as a function of the number of parallel CoT samples 

k.

Run Accuracy (%) 

CoT 1 82.0 CoT 2 85.0 CoT 4 86.5 CoT 8 87.5 CoT 16 88.0 Table 2: Accuracy vs. number of CoT samples on a subset of Geometry3K. 

## C System Prompts 

MARS-GPS uses two system prompts depending on the rollout type. The full reasoning prompt (SP) is used for rollouts requiring step-by-step chain-of-thought, while the answer-only prompt (AOP) is used for fast silent solves. 

Full reasoning prompt (SP). 

You are an expert geometry problem solver. You will receive amultiple-choice geometry problem from the Geometry3K benchmark, followed by structured context automatically extracted by the Pi-GPS parsing pipeline. INPUT FORMAT PROBLEM STATEMENT — The natural-language geometry question. 

CHOICES A / B / C / D — Four candidate numerical answers. Exactly one is correct. 

DIAGRAM LOGIC FORMS — First-order predicates automatically parsed from the dia-gram image. These are parsed automatically and may contain minor errors — treat them as strong hints, not guaranteed truths. 

TEXT LOGIC FORMS — First-order predicates parsed from the problem text. The first predicate is usually the goal. 

SOLVING PROTOCOL 1. Read the problem and all four choices. 

2. Read the diagram logic forms to understand the figure geometry. 

3. Read the text logic forms to confirm the goal and constraints. 

4. Solve step by step using the above context. 

5. Verify your result against the choices. 

OUTPUT FORMAT Output ONLY: \boxed{N} Where N: 1 = A, 2 = B, 3 = C, 4 = D Do not write anything after \boxed{N}. 

Answer-only prompt (AOP). 

Geometry MCQ solver. Choices are A/B/C/D. Context given: diagram logic forms (geometric predicates from the figure), text logic forms (goal +constraints from problem text). Solve silently. Output only: \boxed{N} where 1=A, 2=B, 3=C, 4=D. 

15 Preprint. Under review. 

## D Worked Example 

We present a worked example showing the full pipeline for a representative Geometry3K problem, including the structured context F ∗ passed to fθ and an abbreviated reasoning trace from one rollout. 

Problem. Find PN. Choices: A) 25 B) 30 C) 50 D) 60 

Structured context F ∗. Diagram logic forms: 

> PointLiesOnLine(N, Line(M, C)) PointLiesOnLine(L, Line(M, A)) Perpendicular(Line(M, L), Line(P, L)) Perpendicular(Line(M, N), Line(P, N)) Equals(LengthOf(Line(L, P)), 3x+6) Equals(LengthOf(Line(P, N)), 4x-2) Equals(MeasureOf(Angle(B, M, L)), 25) Equals(MeasureOf(Angle(B, M, N)), 25)

Text logic forms: 

> Find(LengthOf(Line(P,N)))

Rollout reasoning trace (abbreviated).    

> From the diagram, MP bisects

∠BMC since ∠BML = ∠BMN = 25. By the angle bisector and perpendicularity conditions, PL = PN , so: 3x + 6 = 4x − 2 =⇒ x = 8  

> [calls Python sandbox]
> x = 8 PN = 4*x - 2 print(PN)
> [sandbox returns: 30]
> Therefore PN

= 30, which matches choice B. 

\boxed{2} 

Note: All 8 rollouts agreed on answer B (30), triggering early consensus at Step 1. This example illustrates a typical MARS-GPS execution: the model sets up the algebraic equation, uses the Python sandbox to evaluate it exactly, and the ensemble exits immediately via unanimous vote. 

## E Python Sandbox Ablation Details 

Tables 3 and 4 provide detailed results from the sandbox ablation study described in Section 5.2. The ablation was run on a subset of problems from Geometry3K with k=8rollouts, with E fully disabled, code blocks written by fθ were intercepted and replaced with a null response. 

Problem subset % of problems Accuracy 

All problems 100% 85.0% Did not attempt Python 58.0% 92.2% Attempted Python (sandbox blocked) 42.0% 75.0% Table 3: Accuracy breakdown by whether fθ attempted to invoke the Python sandbox E

during the ablation run. Problems where fθ attempted code execution but was blocked are substantially harder, with accuracy dropping to 75.0%. 16 Preprint. Under review. 

Python calls attempted % of problems Accuracy 

0 calls 58.0% 92.2% 1–2 calls 17.0% 79.4% 3–5 calls 10.0% 90.0% 6+ calls 15.0% 60.0% Table 4: Accuracy by number of Python calls attempted per problem when the sandbox is disabled. Problems requiring many code calls (6+) drop to 60.0% accuracy, suggesting these are the most computationally intensive cases and benefit most from sandbox access. The recovery in the 3–5 calls bucket (90.0%) suggests these problems have sufficient symbolic structure that fθ can partially compensate without execution. 

## F Execution Time Analysis 

Table 5 reports average execution time broken down by prediction outcome, and Table 6 shows how accuracy varies across execution time ranges. These results are computed over Geometry3K across two evaluation runs. 

Outcome Accuracy Avg time (s) 

All problems 88.8% 47.0 Correct predictions — 34.6 Wrong predictions — 146.1 Table 5: Average execution time per problem by prediction outcome. Wrong predictions consume 4.2 × more time than correct ones, reflecting the cost of exhausting the verification budget on hard cases. 

Time range % of problems Accuracy 

0–10s 35.3% 98.6% 10–30s 31.2% 94.1% 30–60s 14.8% 89.9% 60–120s 9.0% 72.2% 120–180s 3.0% 61.1% 180–300s 3.5% 47.6% 

>300s 3.2% 42.1% Table 6: Accuracy as a function of execution time range on Geometry3K. Problems resolved within 10 seconds achieve 98.6% accuracy, while problems exceeding 300 seconds drop to 42.1%, confirming that execution time is a reliable proxy for problem difficulty. 

Category Accuracy Avg time (s) Correct (s) Wrong (s) 

Similar figures 96.2% 12.9 11.0 60.0 Trigonometry 85.7% 12.8 5.4 57.1 Triangle 100% 31.2 31.2 —Quadrilateral 96.9% 34.9 28.7 227.7 Length/Other 85.6% 48.3 27.1 173.6 Angle 91.8% 51.7 45.5 121.1 Area 77.4% 53.3 37.8 106.5 Circle 90.0% 56.6 42.7 181.8 Table 7: Per-category accuracy and average execution time on Geometry3K. Area problems have the lowest accuracy (77.4%) and Circle problems have the highest wrong-prediction time (181.8s), indicating the system spends its full verification budget on these categories before falling back. 17