Title: PDDL-Mind: Large Language Models are Capable on Belief Reasoning with Reliable State Tracking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17819v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:13:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# PDDL-M IND : Large Language Models are Capable on Belief Reasoning with Reliable State Tracking 

Qiutong Tony Yi ∗ Wang Bill Zhu ∗ Robin Jia Jesse Thomason 

University of Southern California 

{qiutongy, wangzhu, robinjia, jessetho} @usc.edu 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) perform sub-stantially below human level on existing theory-of-mind (ToM) benchmarks, even when aug-mented with chain-of-thought prompting or probabilistic belief updates. We argue that these failures primarily arise from unreli-able implicit state tracking rather than lim-itations in high-level reasoning. We intro-duce PDDL-M IND , a neuro-symbolic frame-work that decouples environment state evolu-tion from belief inference. By translating nar-rative descriptions into explicit states and ac-tions expressed in Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) , and by verifying action-induced state transitions against a predefined domain, PDDL-M IND provides LLMs with a logically consistent and explicit representa-tion of world states for ToM tasks. Experi-ments on MMToM-QA and MuMa-ToM and FanToM show that PDDL-M IND achieves over 

5% absolute accuracy gain over the best exist-ing state-of-the-art method on ToM benchmark questions. 

1 Introduction 

Theory-of-Mind (ToM) benchmarks present nar-ratives in which agents act in the world and ob-servers must infer what those agents believe, know, or intend. These narratives typically take one of two forms: descriptions of physical actions in an environment, or dialogue transcripts between agents. These variations share a common under-lying structure: each narrative is fundamentally a sequence of events that induces a sequence of world states (Huang et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2025). Frontier large language models (LLMs) continue to perform substantially below human level on these ToM tasks (Jin et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2025).  

> ∗Equal contribution.

There is no consensus on the root cause of these failures. Broadly, two competing hypotheses have emerged. The first attributes errors to state track-ing : models fail to maintain accurate representa-tions of world states as events accumulate over time. The second attributes errors to reasoning : models track the progression of events adequately, but fail during the subsequent inference of beliefs or in-tentions from those states (Huang et al., 2024a). Works from both isles admit ToM benchmark in-stances can be partitioned into chains of events, yet leave the notion of an event unanalyzed be-yond surface segmentation. We argue that a deeper understanding the nature of events permits proper disentanglement of these hypotheses. We draw insight from neo-Davidsonian event semantics. In the neo-Davidsonian view: “Mary lifted the cup to the kitchen,” “Mary walked with the cup,” and “Mary moved something” may all be true of a single occurrence (Schein, 2012; Kratzer, 2023). Defining a verb means specifying the event’s preconditions and effects. Events thus pro-vide a level of abstraction above linguistic varia-tion, a stable referent that diverse verb phrases can converge on. Motivated by this observation, a programming language that places emphasis on predicate defini-tion is a natural substrate to augment LLMs’ event perception and tracking. We introduce PDDL-MIND , a framework that provides a reliable and explicit state-tracking mechanism for ToM narra-tives. Starting from a predefined Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL, Ghallab et al., 1998) domain file with 7 general action types, we use an LLM to parse the initial environment description into a PDDL problem file and to translate narrative events into a sequence of PDDL actions. We then verify each action by checking its preconditions and executing valid transitions within the domain, filtering out invalid actions. As a result, we ob-tain a logically consistent sequence of world states, 1                                      

> arXiv:2604.17819v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026 (define (domain tom) (: types agent obj loc utterance) (: predicates
> (at ?a -agent ?l - loc) (in ?o -obj ?c) (seen ?a - agent ?o -obj ?l - loc?) (heard ?a -agent ?u -utterance) ...) (: action open
> :parameters (?a - agent ?c ?l -loc) :precondition (...) :effect (...)) (: action close ...
> Predefined Domain File
> What's inside the apartment: The apartment consists of a bedroom ,
> kitchen ,living room , and bathroom . In the bedroom , there is a coffee table ...Actions taken by Mary: Mary is in the bathroom . She then proceeds to the kitchen ...
> Narrative
> (: objects
> bedroom bathroom ...) (: init
> (at Mary ...) (seen Mary ...) ...)
> Problem File
> (move Mary ..) (open Mary ...) (close Mary ...) ...
> Action Sequence
> ToM Question
> If Mary has been trying to get a wine bottle, which is more likely to be true? (a) ...
> Verify
> 1.(move ...) (at ... (seen ... (heard ... 2.(open ...) (at ... (seen ... (heard ...
> Verified States
> reasoning… The answer is a.
> Final Answer

Figure 1: Starting from a predefined PDDL domain file, PDDL-M IND use a LLM to parse the narrative description into a PDDL problem file describing an initial world state, and then a PDDL action sequence. After verifying actions by induced state transitions, the LLM takes in a ToM question and verified actions and state transitions to produce a final answer. 

which we manually verified to be correct in 90% 

of cases. Finally, we provide this verified state se-quence to the LLM and evaluate it solely on ToM inference questions. PDDL-M IND with GPT-4o achieves 88 .3% ac-curacy on MMToM-QA and 88 .8% accuracy on MuMa-ToM, using only 3 LLM calls per exam-ple. Both outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method, AutoToM (Zhang et al., 2025), which re-quires an average of 27 LLM calls per example, by more than 5% . These results provide strong evidence that unreliable state tracking, rather than insufficient reasoning capacity, is the primary bot-tleneck in current ToM evaluations of LLMs. 

2 PDDL-M IND 

We introduce PDDL-M IND , a neuro-symbolic framework that decouples environment state evolu-tion from belief inference (Figure 1). 

Predefined domain file. We begin with a prede-fined PDDL domain file. The design is motivated by the structure of existing textual ToM bench-marks, which pose ToM questions after presenting narratives in one of two forms: descriptions of 

physical actions in an environment, or dialogue transcripts between agents. We define four object types in the domain: 

agent , representing people mentioned in the narra-tive (e.g., “Mary”); loc , representing locations in the environment (e.g., “bathroom”); obj , represent-ing physical items (e.g., “apple”); and utterance ,representing spoken messages in the narrative (e.g., “Mary has a golden retriever”). We then define a set of predicates to describe domain states, such as at ,

in , and holding . Crucially, we introduce the pred-icate seen to track whether an object is observed by an agent, and heard to track whether an utter-ance is heard by an agent. Finally, we define seven actions: move , open , close , grab , drop , ask , and 

tell , each with explicitly specified parameters, preconditions, and postconditions. The complete PDDL domain file is provided in Appendix C. 

State and action extraction. Given the domain file, we first prompt an LLM to parse the narra-tive into a PDDL problem file, which specifies the objects present in the environment and the initial state s0. We define a state s as a set of grounded predicates, such as (at Mary bathroom) . We find this step to be relatively straightforward for frontier LLMs, because most ToM benchmarks describe simple, small-scale environments. Next, using both the domain file and the gen-erated problem file, the LLM parses the narrative into a sequence of candidate actions (a1, . . . , a t).Because narratives may include events that can-not be mapped to PDDL actions (e.g., “steps near the sink”), we filter the generated action sequence post-hoc to retain only valid actions. For each can-didate action ai, if the current state si−1 satisfies the action’s preconditions, we accept the action and apply its postconditions to produce the next state si.Otherwise, the action is ignored and not executed. This process yields a verified sequence of actions and corresponding world states. 2Method MMToM-QA MuMa-ToM FanToM                         

> BIP-ALM ⋆56.2 33.9 -LIMP ⋆55.3 76.6 -TT ⋆69.0 -87.4 AutoToM ⋆83.0 81.4 -EnigmaToM ⋆--55.3 Human ⋆82.5 93.5 91.7 PDDL-M IND 88.3 88.8 80.0
> Table 1: PDDL-M IND outperforms existing methods on MMToM-QA and MuMa-ToM and FanToM. ⋆denotes results from previous papers.

ToM question answering. The LLM is provided with the verified state sequence and a ToM question, and is asked to perform inference in a chain-of-thought manner. By conditioning inference on ex-plicitly verified states, PDDL-M IND isolates ToM reasoning from errors in implicit state tracking. We provide additional details on the design of domain files in the next subsection. 

3 Experiment results 

We evaluate PDDL-M IND on three representa-tive ToM benchmarks, spanning single and multi agent settings: MMToM-QA (Jin et al., 2024), which contains 600 examples focusing on long-context action sequence belief and goal inference, MuMa-ToM (Shi et al., 2024), which contains 900 examples targeting belief and goal inference in multi-agent action/conversation sequences, and FanToM (Kim et al., 2023), which contains 10K questions alongside 256 instances in multi-agent conversational belief inference. Each ToM task is a multi-choice question answering evaluated by accu-racy. We compare against five representative base-lines: BIP-ALM (Jin et al., 2024) and LIMP (Shi et al., 2024), which combine Bayesian Inverse Plan-ning with LLMs, with BIP-ALM performing ex-plicit belief updates while LIMP does not; TT (Kim et al., 2025), which traces agents’ mental states by generating and weighting hypotheses based on ob-servations; AutoToM (Zhang et al., 2025), which iteratively constructs and refines agent models tai-lored to each ToM task; and EnigmaToM (Xu et al., 2025), which tracks events using a neural knowledge base. 

PDDL-M IND provides reliable state tracking. 

We report average accuracy for all methods eval-uated with GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) in Table 1. PDDL-M IND outperforms all baselines on both benchmarks, achieving accuracy improvements of more than 5.3% on MMToM-QA and 7.4% on MuMa-ToM. To directly assess state-tracking qual-ity, we manually inspect 20 verified action se-quences per benchmark and find that 36 out of 40 ( 90% ) are correct and fully consistent with the narratives. While all baselines incorporate some form of state tracking, these results indicate that their implicit or heuristic mechanisms are substan-tially less reliable than the explicit verification used in PDDL-M IND .

PDDL-M IND is cost-efficient. PDDL-M IND 

requires only three LLM calls per example, whereas all baseline methods in Table 1 require an order of magnitude more calls. For instance, AutoToM reports an average of 17.6 LLM calls per example on MMToM-QA and 35.1 calls on MuMa-ToM. These results demonstrate that reliable state tracking can be achieved without increased infer-ence cost, and in fact leads to significantly more efficient evaluation. 

Remaining errors reflect both parsing and rea-soning limitations. Despite its strong perfor-mance, PDDL-M IND still exhibits an error rate of approximately 12% when evaluated with GPT-4o. We manually analyze 20 failure cases per bench-mark and find that 13 cases ( 33% ) stem from pars-ing errors that produce incorrect action sequences, while the remaining 67% are due to genuine rea-soning failures given correct states. This analysis suggests that, under perfect state tracking, the error rate would drop to approximately 8% , further sup-porting the claim that state tracking is the dominant bottleneck in current ToM evaluations. We provide qualitative examples in Appendix D.2. 

PDDL-M IND yields consistent gains across models and categories. We further compare PDDL-M IND against more cost-efficient ToM ap-proaches, including vanilla chain-of-thought (CoT), which uses a single LLM call per instance, and DWM (Huang et al., 2024a), which partitions nar-ratives into chunks and queries mental states af-ter each segment. As shown in Table 2, PDDL-MIND consistently outperforms these baselines across nearly all sub-categories of MMToM-QA and MuMa-ToM and across different model back-bones. The sole exception is the Belief cate-gory on MuMa-ToM when using Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (Anthropic, 2024), where both PDDL-M IND 

and DWM exceed 95% accuracy, with DWM out-performing by a modest margin of 3.3% . Further 3Model Method # Calls MMToM-QA MuMa-ToM FanToM                                                                                                             

> Avg. Belief Goal Avg. Belief Goal(S) Goal(B) Avg. Accessibility Answerability Kimi-K2-Instruct CoT 154.2 70.6 42.0 58.9 63.3 66.7 48.0 46.4 43.8 26.1 DWM 431.7 35.3 29.0 54.6 58.9 57.8 58.9 69.8 73.4 61.6 PDDL-M IND 374.5 80.3 68.7 77.3 67.0 85.2 81.8 80.0 73.4 77.8
> GPT-4o CoT 161.4 85.3 43.5 41.8 57.8 31.1 37.0 45.3 27.1 25.9 DWM 436.0 46.0 28.5 63.2 76.7 53.3 60.0 70.9 78.5 70.6 PDDL-M IND 388.3 91.0 85.7 88.8 88.7 92.0 83.3 78.5 72.9 76.6
> Claude-Sonnet-4.5 CoT 169.4 93.3 51.5 58.6 66.7 44.4 64.0 40.5 27.1 26.0 DWM 466.6 76.6 59.0 86.1 98.9 72.2 87.0 61.9 56.7 55.1 PDDL-M IND 390.9 92.7 89.0 88.6 95.6 82.2 87.5 79.3 73.2 73.8

Table 2: PDDL-M IND v.s cost-efficient methods. PDDL-M IND consistently outperform on each sub-category of MMToM-QA, MuMa-ToM and FanToM across models. 

manual inspection reveals that, at such high accu-racy levels, residual parsing errors disproportion-ately limit gains. 

4 Structural Abstraction of ToM Benchmarks 

Figure 2: L: Actions M: Events R: Conversations 

Figure 2 summarizes the underlying structure of ToM benchmark instances through three comple-mentary views, with colors denoting timesteps. 

Single-agent action sequences (left panel). The left panel illustrates a typical single-agent Sally– Anne scenario. Consider the narrative: 

Alice is in the kitchen and opens the fridge , moves to the cabinet and opens it , she moves to the living room , and opens the cabinet there .The colored events correspond to transitions in the left panel of Figure 2. Such instances admit a hierarchical (tree-structured) interpretation: the en-vironment induces a containment structure in which houses contain rooms, rooms contain containers, and containers may contain objects. Each action updates either the agent’s location within this hi-erarchy or their perceptual access (e.g., opening a container). State tracking reduces to maintaining the agent’s position in this structure and recording visibility at each node. Computationally, this corresponds to structured traversal with local state updates, which is reflected in our domain design. 

Multi-agent conversation (right panel). The right panel extends this structural view to multi-agent settings. We model conversation as broad-cast within a shared environment: when an agent speaks, all currently present agents receive and store the utterance. State transitions are therefore defined by how memories evolve over time, inde-pendent of the truth value of the utterances. Agents may leave (ceasing to receive updates) or join mid-conversation (receiving only subsequent informa-tion). Concretely: 

Alice: “I hope everyone is doing well!” Billy: “I need to leave now, talk to you later!” Cliff: “Hope I’m not interrupting!” David: “Of course you’re not!” 

Reading the right panel top-to-bottom, each row is a timestep and each column an agent present at that time. Speech acts induce broadcast edges from the speaker to all listeners, while join/leave events modify the set of recipients. This interaction structure is not strictly hierarchi-cal; instead, it is better understood as evolving in-formation flow over a dynamically changing set of agents. It can be naturally encoded using predicate-based updates such as S PEAK , H EAR , P RESENT ,JOIN , and L EAVE .

A unified event–state abstraction (middle panel). 

The middle panel captures a minimal abstraction shared across ToM benchmarks: a sequence of 4states (nodes) connected by events (edges), read from top to bottom. This view factors out linguis-tic variation and isolates the core dynamics that models must track. Within a unified PDDL formulation, both physi-cal actions and conversational updates are treated as events with preconditions and effects, yielding a consistent and inherently multi-agent representa-tion. Overall, the left panel corresponds to hierarchi-cal state tracking (as in MMToM), the right panel captures multi-agent information flow (as in Fan-ToM), and the middle panel highlights the shared event-driven abstraction that PDDL-M IND gener-alizes across both settings. 

5 Related Work 

Riemer et al. (2025) distinguishes literal ToM (ac-curately verbalizing another agent’s beliefs given context) from functional ToM (adapting one’s pol-icy based on such inferences). We address literal ToM. 

Dynamics of implicit wagers in inference-time augmentation. Inference-time augmenta-tion methods that do not modify model weights share a common incentive: eliciting structure the model is assumed to already possess. This division of labor places an implicit wager that the language model has capability C: if it does, performance im-proves; if not, no scaffold compensates, since there is no more-intelligent system to fall back on. Our results suggest a more favorable wager: separating state tracking from reasoning. Language models reliably parse into constrained symbolic forms and perform variable binding (Wu et al., 2025; Prakash et al., 2025), particularly for PDDL (Liu et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2025); we situate our approach in this regime. 

Probabilistic methods. One family wagers on numerical confidence estimates. AutoToM (Zhang et al., 2025) and BIP-ALM (Jin et al., 2024) require LM logits over actions conditioned on hypothe-sized goals and beliefs, then aggregate via Bayes’ rule across timesteps. ThoughtTracing (Kim et al., 2025) assigns each hypothesis a numerical weight by mapping LLM categorical likelihood judgments to fixed scores, tuning favorability under random resampling. These approaches hinge on LLMs in-ducing a coherent probability measure over action– goal–belief triples, calibrated to track the diag-nosticity of evidence; such measures remain im-plicit in the training distribution (Huang et al., 2024b). We hypothesize a second architectural hazard: when scalar comparison is the sole inter-mediate arbiter, upstream linguistic richness cannot overcome a numerical bottleneck at the decision point—information that does not separate the scalar cannot affect the outcome, regardless of how richly it was represented moments before. PDDL-M IND 

avoids this bottleneck by preserving linguistic struc-ture throughout inference, aligning with discrete methods. 

Discrete state methods. Partially sidestepping these hazards, DWM (Huang et al., 2024a), Enig-maToM (Xu et al., 2025), and PDDL-M IND em-brace discreteness by parsing natural language into symbolic representations while assuming determin-istic transition rules. DWM and EnigmaToM place two wagers: that neural models can identify state-relevant events and correctly infer the transition rules. Our work shows the second wager is unneces-sary. The transition semantics of ToM benchmarks are fully specified by their verb inventories, with explicit preconditions and effects; asking a model to “discover” what a benchmark already defines invites hallucination and inconsistency. 

Textual ToM benchmarks. A large body of theory-of-mind benchmarks are purely textual, in-cluding ToMi (Le et al., 2019), BigToM (Gandhi et al., 2023), Hi-ToM (Wu et al., 2023), Fan-ToM (Kim et al., 2023), OpenToM (Xu et al., 2024), and NegotiationToM (Chan et al., 2024). We did not test on all of these benchmarks, as they all share a common narrative structure: each presents a se-quence of events in one of two forms—descriptions of physical actions within an environment, or di-alogue transcripts between agents. Moreover, re-sults from prior methods (e.g., AutoToM) indicate that several benchmarks, such as ToMi and Big-ToM, are already saturated, limiting their utility for distinguishing model capabilities. 

Prompting-based ToM methods. Prior prompting-based approaches to ToM emphasize the apparent limitations of LLMs in mental-state reasoning. For instance, SymbolicToM (Sclar et al., 2023) constructs explicit belief graphs for each character, SimToM (Wilf et al., 2024) filters narratives to retain only events observable to a target agent before prompting, and TimeToM (Hou et al., 2024) augments stories with explicit 5temporal structure. Although superficially similar, PDDL-M IND is grounded in a fundamentally different perspective: LLMs are capable of theory-of-mind reasoning, but are primarily limited by unreliable state tracking. This perspective finds theoretical grounding in GEPA’s (Agrawal et al., 2025) principle of competence-aligned scaffolding. Effective augmentation identifies what the model performs reliably and externalizes the rest. LLMs interpret linguistic feedback productively but learn poorly from scalar gradients; GEPA accordingly shifts learning to language-based reflection. LLMs reason over explicit states adequately but recover states from narrative variation unreliably; PDDL-M IND accordingly shifts state tracking to verified PDDL transitions. Enabling substantially improved ToM inference. 

6 Conclusion 

We show that current LLM failures on ToM tasks primarily reflect unreliable implicit state tracking rather than deficiencies in high-level reasoning, and that PDDL untangling isolates this bottleneck. We therefore argue that future ToM benchmarks should treat accurate, verifiable state tracking as a prereq-uisite for meaningful assessment. Broader philo-sophical implications of this disentanglement are discussed in Appendix A. 

Implications for benchmark structure. Across existing ToM benchmarks, tree-like structure fre-quently emerges as a convenient abstraction for tracking event effects. This prevalence reflects implicit inductive biases: (i) Sally–Anne-style ac-tion narratives assume a hierarchical, containment-based world, and (ii) conversational benchmarks impose a fixed temporal order that yields an acyclic update structure. Recognizing these biases, and the fact that trees are a strict subset of graphs, allows us to impose a stronger structural constraint on ToM state-tracking models than prior graph-based formulations such as Xu et al. (2025), which treat entity dynamics more generally. At the same time, this perspective highlights a limitation of current benchmarks: their structural regularities may enable success via sym-bolic state tracking alone. We therefore advocate for future benchmark designs that move beyond these biases to better probe robust and generaliz-able ToM reasoning. 

Limitations 

PDDL-M IND operates entirely on textual inputs and symbolic abstractions, and therefore does not address multimodal ToM scenarios involving vi-sual, spatial, or embodied perception. Extending the framework to grounded or multimodal environ-ments would require integrating perception mod-ules and aligning their outputs with symbolic state representations, which is beyond the scope of this work. Our approach also relies on a predefined PDDL domain, which introduces brittleness for weaker models that struggle to correctly parse narratives into symbolic actions and states. While frontier models handle this parsing reliably in our exper-iments, improving robustness for smaller or less capable models remains an open challenge. 

References       

> Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Ar-nav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2025. GEPA: Reflective prompt evo-lution can outperform reinforcement learning. In
> First Workshop on Foundations of Reasoning in Lan-guage Models .Anthropic. 2024. System card: Claude sonnet 4.5. Chunkit Chan, Cheng Jiayang, Yauwai Yim, Zheye Deng, Wei Fan, Haoran Li, Xin Liu, Hongming Zhang, Weiqi Wang, and Yangqiu Song. 2024. Ne-gotiationToM: A benchmark for stress-testing ma-chine theory of mind on negotiation surrounding. In
> Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4211–4241, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Kanishk Gandhi, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Gersten-berg, and Noah Goodman. 2023. Understanding social reasoning in language models with language models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Bench-marks Track .Malik Ghallab, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, Drew McDermott, Ashwin Ram, Manuela Veloso, Daniel Weld, and David Wilkins. 1998. PDDL - the planning domain definition language. Technical Report, Tech. Rep.
> Guiyang Hou, Wenqi Zhang, Yongliang Shen, Linjuan Wu, and Weiming Lu. 2024. TimeToM: Temporal space is the key to unlocking the door of large lan-guage models’ theory-of-mind. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,

6pages 11532–11547, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. X. Angelo Huang, Emanuele La Malfa, Samuele Marro, Andrea Asperti, Anthony G. Cohn, and Michael J. Wooldridge. 2024a. A notion of complexity for the-ory of mind via discrete world models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 2964–2983, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yukun Huang, Yixin Liu, Raghuveer Thirukovalluru, Arman Cohan, and Bhuwan Dhingra. 2024b. Cali-brating long-form generations from large language models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 13441– 13460, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Chuanyang Jin, Yutong Wu, Jing Cao, Jiannan Xiang, Yen-Ling Kuo, Zhiting Hu, Tomer Ullman, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Tianmin Shu. 2024. Mmtom-qa: Multimodal theory of mind ques-tion answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08743 .Hyunwoo Kim, Melanie Sclar, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Lance Ying, Sydney Levine, Yang Liu, Joshua B. Tenen-baum, and Yejin Choi. 2025. Hypothesis-driven theory-of-mind reasoning for large language mod-els. In COLM .Hyunwoo Kim, Melanie Sclar, Xuhui Zhou, Ronan Le Bras, Gunhee Kim, Yejin Choi, and Maarten Sap. 2023. Fantom: A benchmark for stress-testing ma-chine theory of mind in interactions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Angelika Kratzer. 2023. Situations in Natural Language Semantics. In Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, editors, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ,Fall 2023 edition. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stan-ford University. Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. 2019. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind through question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5872–5877, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone. 2023. LLM+P: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. ArXiv preprint .OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.21276. Nikhil Prakash, Natalie Shapira, Arnab Sen Sharma, Christoph Riedl, Yonatan Belinkov, Tamar Rott Shaham, David Bau, and Atticus Geiger. 2025. Language models use lookbacks to track beliefs. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.14685. Matthew Riemer, Zahra Ashktorab, Djallel Bouneffouf, Payel Das, Miao Liu, Justin D. Weisz, and Murray Campbell. 2025. Position: Theory of mind bench-marks are broken for large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learn-ing Position Paper Track .Barry Schein. 2012. Event Semantics. In Gillian Russell, Delia Graff Fara, ed., The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Language , pages 280–294. Melanie Sclar, Sachin Kumar, Peter West, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2023. Minding lan-guage models’ (lack of) theory of mind: A plug-and-play multi-character belief tracker. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 13960–13980, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Haojun Shi, Suyu Ye, Xinyu Fang, Chuanyang Jin, Layla Isik, Yen-Ling Kuo, and Tianmin Shu. 2024. Muma-tom: Multi-modal multi-agent theory of mind. 

Preprint , arXiv:2408.12574. Alex Wilf, Sihyun Lee, Paul Pu Liang, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2024. Think twice: Perspective-taking improves large language models’ theory-of-mind capabilities. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8292–8308, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yiwei Wu, Atticus Geiger, and Raphaël Millière. 2025. How do transformers learn variable binding in sym-bolic programs? In Forty-second International Con-ference on Machine Learning .Yufan Wu, Yinghui He, Yilin Jia, Rada Mihalcea, Yu-long Chen, and Naihao Deng. 2023. Hi-ToM: A benchmark for evaluating higher-order theory of mind reasoning in large language models. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 10691–10706, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hainiu Xu, Siya Qi, Jiazheng Li, Yuxiang Zhou, Jinhua Du, Caroline Catmur, and Yulan He. 2025. Enig-maToM: Improve LLMs’ theory-of-mind reasoning capabilities with neural knowledge base of entity states. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 13598–13622, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Hainiu Xu, Runcong Zhao, Lixing Zhu, Jinhua Du, and Yulan He. 2024. OpenToM: A comprehensive bench-mark for evaluating theory-of-mind reasoning capa-bilities of large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8593–8623, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

7Zhining Zhang, Chuanyang Jin, Mung Yao Jia, and Tianmin Shu. 2025. Autotom: Automated bayesian inverse planning and model discovery for open-ended theory of mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15676 .Wang Bill Zhu, Ishika Singh, Robin Jia, and Jesse Thomason. 2025. Language models can infer action semantics for symbolic planners from environment feedback. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8751–8773, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

8Appendix 

A Philosophical Implications 9B Ablations 11 C Prompts 11 D Experiment Details 12 

D.1 Implementation Details . . . . . . 12 D.2 Error Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

E Ethics and Risks 14 

A Philosophical Implications 

> Figure 3: The Picasso Thesis

This section discusses philosophical implications of disentangling state tracking from belief infer-ence. Complexity frameworks such as Huang et al. (2024a) propose that the complexity of theory-of-mind tasks can be characterized by the number of states an observer must track. This view presup-poses that a task comes with a natural partition into discrete states. We argue that such partitions exist only under specific structural conditions, and that making these conditions explicit clarifies both the scope and the limits of rigorous ToM evaluation. Inferring artistic intention from a painting is itself a theory-of-mind task. Consider Picasso’s 

Lover in a Beret in Figure 3. If asked to interpret Pi-casso’s intentions, a typical human viewer may first recognize a human face in the center of the frame. This recognition constitutes immediate progress to-ward attributing an intention (to depict a face), after which the viewer can further decompose the face into subcomponents (e.g., nose, eyes) and stylistic distortions characteristic of cubist portraiture. However, human face’s physiology is shaped by millennia of selection pressures under Earth’s con-ditions. Now imagine presenting the same painting to an alien with human-comparable intelligence but whose evolution under a distinct environment yields no facial similarity to humans. If the alien has never encountered a human face, it is unreason-able to expect even the shallow interpretations that humans with the requisite background knowledge achieve effortlessly. Instead, the alien may rely on a more basic representation: geometric properties of the image, trajectories of lines and curves, enclosed shapes, and relations among regions. The alien is likely to form a partition of the painting starkly dif-ferent from Figure 3. One might argue that humans also use geometric information—perhaps passing through a geometric stage before recognizing that a face is a face and a nose is a nose. If so, the earlier depiction of interpretation omitted several inter-mediate steps: humans compress many geometric primitives into a single semantic unit. The curves and angles undergo a gestalt transformation and was assigned contingent hierarchies by a viewer who possesses the concept “face.” This thought experiment poses a challenge for state-counting approaches to ToM complexity. The same painting induces markedly different state rep-resentations depending on the observer’s concep-tual vocabulary. For a human, the painting may involve tracking a small number of semantic units (face, expression, background). For the alien, it may require tracking many more geometric prim-itives. If the number of states depends on the ob-server in this way, state counts cannot be treated as an intrinsic property of the task. Instead, the partitioning procedure that produces those states— and its upstream epistemological commitments— becomes the central object of analysis. Complex-ity derived from state statistics is thus observer-relative, and cross-observer comparisons lose a clear meaning. Consequently, any benchmark in-tended to be solvable by state-tracking algorithms alone must eliminate this relativity by fixing the vo-cabulary relative to which states are individuated. Fixing a vocabulary and its update rules effec-tively encodes an algorithm. Each benchmark spec-ifies, through its verb inventory and the semantics of those verbs, a procedure for computing state transitions. Under such designs, success reduces to recovering this algorithm from narrative input and executing it correctly. ToM evaluation in these set-tings becomes a form of algorithm recovery. The extent to which world knowledge participates in this recovery process admits a hierarchy. At the minimal end, the algorithm is recoverable from 9syntax alone. For example, “Mary moves the ball to the basket” encodes agent, object, and destina-tion in its argument structure; a syntactic parse can populate the slots of an update function without requiring knowledge of what moving, balls, or bas-kets are. Sally–Anne benchmarks often operate near this regime: verb inventories are constrained, syntactic frames are uniform, and the algorithm reduces to maintaining a record of which agents were present when which verbs applied to which arguments. One step beyond syntax, the algorithm requires lexical semantics. Many subjective predi-cates implicitly parameterize a continuous internal degree whose value is mediated by external con-text. Modeling such verbs may therefore require representing latent scalar state variables and up-dating them when relevant external events occur. Because external events can continuously modu-late these latent degrees, reliable inference requires explicit tracking of their event-conditioned updates rather than recovering them from narrative surface form alone. More broadly, lexical semantics can introduce additional latent mental variables. For instance, to properly compute hide -related condi-tions, one may need to track an implicit variable capturing an agent’s aversion to being discovered, maybe even by a specific person. Such transition semantics are not recoverable from syntax alone and often require simulating a world model that includes variables not explicitly present in the pred-icate parameters. Selecting such variables depends on inductive biases that are not resolved by the more rudimentary structural biases discussed above (tree structure, fixed arrow of time, syntax). Further along the hierarchy, the algorithm requires compo-sitional integration of long-tail world knowledge embedded in narrative form. As with interpret-ing another agent’s interpretation of Picasso, the same syntactic frame—with identical grammatical roles—can demand different transition semantics depending on what the model knows about domains not explicitly mentioned in the narrative. A charac-ter’s reaction may depend on biological inheritance, professional norms, or cultural and historical con-ventions that no verb encodes. Computing the cor-rect state transition then requires recognizing the relevance of such facts and retrieving them from outside the text. This hierarchy suggests two directions for bench-mark evolution.   

> advance
> approach
> close
> complete
> conclude
> continue
> follow
> head
> leave
> make
> move
> navigate
> open
> poise
> prepare
> proceed
> repeat
> retrace
> return
> secure
> shut
> situate
> stride
> walk
> move open close

Figure 4: 17 out of 24 verbs that appeared in MMToM can are functionally identical to a set of three predicates 

First, benchmarks can vary the algorithm as-sociated with a verb across instances. In Sally– Anne-style action sequences, verbs such as “move” typically correspond to a single, uniform update rule (e.g., updating spatial containment). More-over, many benchmarks admit substantial lexical variation without introducing new transition dy-namics: for example, although “leave” differs from “move” in surface form, both effectively denote a change in an agent’s occupied location and there-fore reduce to the same underlying state update. Figure 4 illustrates this collapse in MMToM, where 17 of 24 verbs ( ≈ 70% ) are functionally equivalent to one of three predefined PDDL actions, while the rest can be safely ignored without compromis-ing the causal fidelity of the parsed action chain. This kind of synonymy lowers the burden of al-gorithm recovery once a small set of transition rules is learned. A more resistant design would break this uniformity by allowing the same sur-face verb to realize different transition functions across contexts: “move” in one scenario could up-date spatial containment, while “move” in another (e.g., chess) updates strategic position. Under iden-tical syntax, the correct algorithm would then be context-dependent, and a system that has learned one interpretation of “move” would not transfer without first identifying which interpretation the current scenario requires. Second, benchmarks can expand the world model so that only systems with human-level integration of long-tail knowledge can answer the questions posed. Certain benchmarks are solvable by symbolic methods because the rel-evant domain can be fully specified in advance: a PDDL file enumerates predicates, verbs, and up-date rules. A benchmark that intentionally exceeds this closure would be less amenable to symbolic assistance. BigToM (Gandhi et al., 2023) is one example, where language models generate novel instances using long-tail knowledge. However, Big-ToM is now saturated, with Gemini 2.0 scoring 86.33% and GPT-4o scoring 82.42% (Kim et al., 2025). In benchmarks of this kind, correct tran-sitions may depend on facts about genetics, eco-nomics, or social convention that cannot be exhaus-10 Table 3: Ablation study on the effect of predefined domain and verification components.          

> Method MMToM-QA MuMa-ToM FanToM
> PDDL-M IND (w/o predefined domain) 74.9 78.9 69.7 PDDL-M IND (w/o verification) 77.4 79.6 74.7

tively enumerated in a domain file. Only a system that has acquired broad world knowledge—a lan-guage model or a human—can reliably recognize the relevance of such facts and retrieve them appro-priately. 

B Ablations 

Two pieces in our design were critical to the pipeline’s success: The predefined domain file and the symbolic verification of states derived from the parsed action sequence. We ablate the two sections respectively on all three benchmarks for GPT-4o. The results are reported in Table 3. For the predefined domain ablation, the model looks at one example per benchmark and generates its own PDDL domain. For the verification ablation, no intermediate states were provided to the language model. We noticed a less-than-expected drop in ac-curacy in ablation 1. We hypothesize that instances within a benchmark share a considerable amount of structure, and thus even domain file constructed on one few-shot example generalizes to the entire benchmark. 

C Prompts 

We list the domain file (Listing 1) and the prompt for LLMs (Listing 2, 3, 4) here. Note that for the domain file, we write specific simulator for the “forall” operation as effects, which is not supported even by the latest PDDL. 

Listing 1: PDDL domain used in PDDL-M IND 

(define (domain tom_general) (: requirements :strips) (: types agent obj loc utterance) ; agent, object, location and utterance (: predicates 

;; Required for all scenarios, if for communication data, create an abstract location (e.g. conversation) for everyone present (at ?a - agent ?l - loc) ; agent a is at location l. ;; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents (is-open ?c) ; c is open, c is a container, which can be an object or a location. (is-loc ?c) ;container c is a location (e.g. a room). (in ?o - obj ?c) ; object o is in container c, which can be an object or a location, do NOT declare object X on some other object Y, instead, declare object X "in" the same container as object Y. (holding ?a - agent ?o - obj) ; agent is holding object o. (seen ?a - agent ?o - obj ?l - loc?) ; agent a has seen object o at location l. ;; Communication tracking, ONLY use when agents have active conversations (said ?a - agent ?u - utterance) ; agent a said utterance u. (heard ?a - agent ?u - utterance) ; agent a heard utterance u. );; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents ;; agent moves from a start room to a dest room, sees all objects visible in the destination room (: action move :parameters (?a - agent ?start - loc ?dest -loc) :precondition (at ?a ?start) :effect (and 

(forall (?o - obj) 

when (in ?o ?dest) (seen ?a ?o ?dest) )));; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents ;; open a container c at location l, the container can be an object or a location. (: action open :parameters (?a - agent ?c ?l - loc) :precondition (and 

(at ?a ?l) (or 

(in ?c ?l) (is-loc ?c) )):effect (and 

(is-open ?c) (forall (?o - obj) 

when (in ?o ?c) (seen ?a ?o ?l) )));; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents ;; close a container c at location l, the container can be an object or a location. (: action close :parameters (?a - agent ?c ?l - loc) :precondition (and 

(at ?a ?l) (is-open ?c) (or 

(in ?c ?l) 

11 (is-loc ?c) )):effect (not (is-open ?c)) );; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents ;; grab an object o at location l (: action grab :parameters (?a - agent ?o - obj ?l - loc) :precondition (and 

(at ?a ?l) (in ?o ?l) (not (holding ?a ?o)) ):effect (and 

(holding ?a ?o) (not (in ?o ?l)) (seen ?a ?o ?l) ));; Physical movement, ONLY use when the data is about MOVING agents ;; drop an object o at location l (: action drop :parameters (?a - agent ?o - obj ?l - loc) :precondition (and 

(at ?a ?l) (holding ?a ?o) ):effect (and 

(not (holding ?a ?o)) (in ?o ?l) ));; Communication tracking, ONLY use when agents have active conversations ;; agent a tells others an utterance u (: action tell :parameters (?a - agent ?u - utterance) :precondition () :effect (and 

(said ?a ?u) ;; Hear of other agents will be handled in simulation ));; Communication tracking, ONLY use when agents have active conversations ;; agent hears an utterance u at location l ( while present), can be triggered by action tell (: action hear :parameters (?a - agent ?l - loc ?u -utterance) :precondition (and (at ?a ?l)) :effect (and (heard ?a ?u)) ))

Listing 2: Prompt template used for PDDL problem file generation 

The domain types and predicates definition for the current environment: [[domain_type_pred]] Given the above domain types and predicates, please write the PDDL problem file for the following environment. All rooms (locations) are seen. All objects are NOT seen. Please list the objects (with their types) and the initial state faithfully, but only a dummy goal state like (:goal ). Environment: [[environment]] 

Listing 3: Prompt template used for PDDL action ex-traction 

Domain: [[domain]] Initially, the environment states are [[init_state]] Parse the following actions including the ongoing actions into PDDL format given the domain PDDL. Only take the single-agent perspective actions: move, open and close in the domain PDDL. Only use the objects provided. Format the final PDDL action list as "Executed Actions: (action1 ...) ... Ongoing Actions: (action2 ...) ..." [[action]] 

Listing 4: Prompt template used for ToM question an-swering 

[[names]] was/were in an environment with these actions allowed: [[domain_action_name]]. [[ action]] We break down the actions taken by [[names]] with location, the seen objects lists, and heard utterance lists. [[act_state_seq]][[ongoing_prompt]] [[question]] [[notes]] Please answer based on the above information. [[final_format]] 

D Experiment Details 

D.1 Implementation Details 

For all models and all benchmarks, we use a temper-ature of 0 and a max token of 4,096 for LLM infer-ence. To avoid data leakage, we stratified the sam-ple 50 examples per sub-category on each bench-mark, such that we exclude the examples used to design PDDL domain file and prompt templates. 12 D.2 Error Analysis 

Listing 5: Example on failed example in MMToM-QA with reasoning errors. 

Narratives: What 's inside the apartment: The apartment consists of a bedroom, a bathroom, a living room, and a kitchen. In the bedroom, there is a coffee table with a dish bowl, a remote control, a plate, and a water glass on it. The bathroom houses a cabinet, which is currently empty. The living room is furnished with a cabinet, a coffee table, a sofa, and a desk. The cabinet contains three apples, a condiment bottle, three water glasses, a remote control, a wine glass, and a dish bowl. A water glass is placed on the coffee table. The kitchen is equipped with a fridge, a stove, a kitchen table, and a microwave. Inside the fridge, there are two dish bowls and a bottle of wine. The stove contains four plates, a salmon, and a cupcake. The microwave holds a salmon, a condiment bottle , and a bag of chips. Actions taken by Karen: Karen is situated in the kitchen. She strides towards the refrigerator, opens it, and subsequently closes it. Following this, she opens the microwave and then securely shuts it. -------------------------------------------------Predicted action sequence: (move Karen kitchen fridge) (open Karen fridge kitchen) (close Karen fridge kitchen) (open Karen microwave kitchen) (close Karen microwave kitchen) -------------------------------------------------Verified action sequence: Initially, Karen is situated in the kitchen Seen objects: fridge, kitchen_table, microwave Heard utterance: N/A 1. (open Karen fridge kitchen) Seen objects: fridge, kitchen_table, microwave, dish_bowl_3, dish_bowl_4, wine_bottle Heard utterance: N/A 2. (close Karen fridge kitchen) Seen objects: fridge, kitchen_table, microwave, dish_bowl_3, dish_bowl_4, wine_bottle Heard utterance: N/A 3. (open Karen microwave kitchen) Seen objects: fridge, kitchen_table, microwave, dish_bowl_3, dish_bowl_4, wine_bottle, salmon_2, condiment_bottle_2, chips. Heard utterance: N/A 4. (close Karen microwave kitchen) Seen objects: fridge, kitchen_table, microwave, dish_bowl_3, dish_bowl_4, wine_bottle, salmon_2, condiment_bottle_2, chips. Heard utterance: N/A -------------------------------------------------Question: Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true? (a) Karen has been trying to get a bag of chips. (b) Karen has been trying to get a remote control. -------------------------------------------------Reasoning & Answer: Karen interacted with the fridge and the microwave, both of which revealed the presence of chips upon opening the microwave . Since she did not pick up the chips after seeing them, it suggests she might be looking for something else. However, she did not interact with any other objects or containers that might suggest a search for a remote control. Therefore, the presence of chips and the lack of any interaction with objects related to a remote control make option (a) more likely. The answer is a. 

Listing 6: Example on failed example in MMToM-QA with parsing errors. 

Narratives: What 's inside the apartment: The apartment consists of a bedroom, kitchen, living room, and bathroom. In the bedroom, there is a coffee table and a desk The kitchen is equipped with four cabinets, a fridge, a microwave, a kitchen table, and a stove. The fourth cabinet from the left houses two water glasses, while the second and third cabinets are empty. The first cabinet contains a water glass, a dish bowl, and a condiment bottle. Inside the fridge, there is a plate and an apple, and a cupcake is in the microwave. The stove contains a plate and a piece of salmon. The living room features a cabinet, a coffee table, a sofa, and a desk. The cabinet is filled with two books, a water glass, a bag of chips, a bottle of wine, two remote controls, two apples, a wine glass, and a condiment bottle. The coffee table holds two dish bowls and a water glass. The bathroom has a cabinet, which is currently empty. Actions taken by David: David is situated in the kitchen. He strides towards the fourth kitchen cabinet, opens it, subsequently closes it, and is now preparing to open the third kitchen cabinet. -------------------------------------------------Predicted action sequence: (move David kitchen cabinet_kitchen_4) (open David cabinet_kitchen_4 kitchen) 

13 (close David cabinet_kitchen_4 kitchen) Ongoing action sequence: (open David cabinet_kitchen_3 kitchen) -------------------------------------------------Verified action sequence: Initially, David is situated in the kitchen Seen objects: stove Heard utterance: N/A 1. (move David kitchen cabinet_kitchen_4) Seen objects: stove, water_glass_1, water_glass_2 Heard utterance: N/A [[Note that cabinet_kitchen_4 is parsed as a location with (is-loc cabinet_kitchen_4), making the action sequence stops at 'move ',also cabinet_kitchen_1, cabinet_kitchen_2, cabinet_kitchen_3, cabinet_kitchen_4 are not listed are seen objects due to this.]] -------------------------------------------------Question: Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true? (a) Karen has been trying to get a bag of chips. (b) Karen has been trying to get a remote control. -------------------------------------------------Reasoning & Answer: David is searching through the cabinets, which suggests he believes the bottle of wine might be in one of them. The answer is a. 

E Ethics and Risks 

Potential risks. Our method conditions LLMs on a predefined PDDL domain file that specifies permissible actions and state transitions. While this design improves state-tracking reliability, it also introduces potential risks. Broadly, providing structured domain knowledge to LLMs raises the risk that reported performance improvements re-flect alignment with the predefined schema rather than intrinsic gains in reasoning ability. To mitigate this, we release the full domain specification and prompts, and encourage future work to evaluate robustness under alternative or extended domain definitions. 

Data and model use. We use public dataset MMToM-QA and MuMa-ToM, which are both un-der MIT license. Both datasets are anonymized and contain no human private data. GPT-4o (OpenAI) and Claude-4.5-Sonnet (Anthropic) are accessible exclusively via commercial APIs. These systems are governed by restrictive Terms of Service that prohibit model weight extraction, reverse engineer-ing, and competitive distillation, serving to protect their respective architectural innovations and agen-tic harnesses. Kimi-K2-Instruct operates under a Modified MIT License; this variant permits general commercial use but mandates strictly visible attri-bution for entities exceeding 100 million monthly active users or $20 million in monthly revenue. 

LLM use. We use LLMs to generate PDDL prob-lem files and action sequences, to answer theory-of-mind questions in our experiments, and to improve writing fluency and correct grammatical errors. 14