Title: Text-Graph Synergy: A Bidirectional Verification and Completion Framework for RAG

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05643v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 00:35:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Text-Graph Synergy: A Bidirectional Verification and Completion Framework for RAG 

## Jiarui Zhong , Hong Cai Chen ∗

## School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 220245143@seu.edu.cn, chenhc@seu.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has be-come a core paradigm for enhancing factual grounding and multi-hop reasoning in Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs). Traditional text-based RAG often retrieves logically irrelevant pseudo-evidence, while graph-based RAG is frequently hindered by search-time pruning, which may dis-card potentially valid reasoning paths. Exist-ing hybrid approaches primarily adopt simple ev-idence concatenation or unidirectional enhance-ment, which fails to address the fundamental ”In-formation Island” problem caused by asymmet-ric reasoning flows between unstructured text and structured graphs. We propose TGS-RAG , a uni-fied framework for Text-Graph Synergistic en-hancement. TGS-RAG introduces a bidirectional mechanism: (i) a Graph-to-Text channel that em-ploys a Global Voting strategy from visited graph nodes to re-rank and refine textual evidence, filter-ing out semantic noise; and (ii) a Text-to-Graph 

channel that utilizes the Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging algorithm. This algorithm uti-lizes textual cues to proactively resurrect valid but previously pruned reasoning paths from the search history without additional database over-head. Experimental results on multiple multi-hop reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that TGS-RAG significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving a superior balance between retrieval pre-cision and computational efficiency. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance in natural language understanding and gener-ation across a wide range of tasks. However, despite their impressive parametric capacity, LLMs remain fundamentally limited by their reliance on static internal knowledge and their tendency to produce hallucinated or logically inconsis-tent responses [Ji et al. , 2023], particularly in knowledge-intensive and multi-hop reasoning scenarios. Retrieval-

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

Figure 1: Comparison between isolated retrieval paradigms and the TGS-RAG framework. (a) Existing paradigms suffer from the ”Information Island” gap: text-based methods often retrieve se-mantically similar but logically irrelevant pseudo-evidence , while graph-based methods are hindered by broken reasoning paths due to search-time pruning. (b) TGS-RAG bridges this gap through a bidirectional synergy mechanism, where graph structure guides the re-ranking of text to identify true evidence, and textual context facil-itates the recovery of pruned but potentially valid reasoning paths. 

Augmented Generation (RAG) has therefore emerged as a central paradigm for grounding LLM outputs in external, ver-ifiable evidence, enabling more factual, controllable, and in-terpretable generation [Lewis et al. , 2020]. Existing RAG systems predominantly follow two distinct paradigms. Text-based RAG retrieves relevant information from large unstructured corpora using dense vector similar-ity. While this paradigm offers high coverage, it is prone to retrieving pseudo-evidence [Cossio, 2025]—textual chunks that are semantically similar to the query but logically irrele-vant, and struggle with complex multi-hop reasoning. In con-trast, Graph-based RAG leverages structured Knowledge Graphs (KGs) to provide high logical interpretability. How-ever, these systems are often constrained by both structural sparsity in KGs and search-time pruning that may discard po-tentially useful reasoning paths. Recent research attempts to combine Text-based RAG and Graph-based RAG to exploit their complementary strengths. However, these approaches often rely on simple evidence concatenation or pipeline-style augmentation, which treat textual and graphical evidence as independent sources, fail-

> arXiv:2605.05643v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

ing to achieve deep integration. Furthermore, unidirectional enhancement frameworks (e.g., KG-infused RAG) typically utilize one modality merely as an auxiliary signal for the other. Such designs fail to establish a closed-loop interac-tion, leaving the deeper potential of mutual verification and co-discovery largely unexplored. At the core of this limitation lies the Information Island problem : textual evidence and graphical evidence are re-trieved and processed in isolation, without a mechanism for mutual validation or collaborative reasoning. Specifically, current systems lack a principled framework in which (i) the structured logical constraints encoded in graphs can guide and refine text retrieval, while simultaneously (ii) the rich contextual cues present in unstructured text can validate, en-rich, and recover pruned but potentially useful graph reason-ing paths. In practice, this often means that the text and graph channels retrieve evidence that appears relevant on their own, but fails to mutually support a coherent reasoning chain. To address these challenges, we propose Text-Graph Syn-ergy RAG (TGS-RAG) 1, a novel framework that enables deep, bidirectional integration between unstructured text and structured knowledge graphs during retrieval. TGS-RAG in-troduces a bidirectional enhancement mechanism: a Graph-to-Text channel that utilizes structured logic to re-rank textual chunks, and a Text-to-Graph channel that leverages contex-tual clues to validate and complete KG paths. Our main con-tributions are as follows: • Bidirectional Synergy Framework: We propose TGS-RAG, a unified framework that breaks the ”informa-tion island” barrier by establishing a closed-loop feed-back mechanism: graph structures guide the re-ranking of textual evidence (Graph-to-Text), while textual con-text validates and repairs graph reasoning paths (Text-to-Graph). This closed-loop design allows the two chan-nels to move beyond simple coexistence and mutually verify the evidence retrieved by each other. • Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging: We intro-duce a novel algorithm that addresses the loss of poten-tially useful reasoning paths during beam-search prun-ing by treating pruned nodes as a deferred reasoning memory . By leveraging textual cues to ”resurrect” these orphan entities, we recover potentially valid reasoning paths discarded during initial search. • Cost-Effective Dual-Channel Reasoning: We design a synergistic scoring mechanism that combines semantic similarity with structural voting. This approach effec-tively filters out pseudo-evidence and achieves an opti-mal Pareto frontier, delivering state-of-the-art accuracy with significantly lower token consumption than global graph indexing methods. • Empirical Superiority: Extensive experiments on MuSiQue and HotpotQA demonstrate that TGS-RAG significantly outperforms existing text-based, graph-based, and hybrid baselines, particularly in scenarios re-quiring complex multi-hop reasoning across disjointed evidence. 

> 1https://github.com/EvannZhongg/TGS RAG.git

## 2 Related Work 

The evolution of RAG has transitioned from simple text matching to complex multi-modal and structural fusion. Our work builds upon three main research areas. 

2.1 Unstructured Retrieval for RAG 

Traditional RAG systems primarily rely on unstructured re-trieval, where dense vector representations facilitate seman-tic matching between queries and documents. Dense Pas-sage Retrieval (DPR) Karpukhin et al. [2020] pioneered the dual-encoder architecture for open-domain question an-swering, significantly improving recall over lexical meth-ods. Subsequent models like ColBERT Khattab and Za-haria [2020] introduced late interaction mechanisms to cap-ture fine-grained token-level similarities. While these models excel at broad knowledge coverage, they often struggle with multi-hop queries where semantic similarity does not neces-sarily imply logical relevance, leading to the retrieval of mis-leading ”pseudo-evidence.” 

2.2 Structured Retrieval for RAG 

To address the logical limitations of text-based retrieval, re-cent studies have explored Knowledge Graphs (KGs) as struc-tured knowledge sources. Methods in this category typi-cally extract subgraphs or relational paths to provide deter-ministic evidence for LLMs. For instance, G-Retriever He 

et al. [2024] employs a GNN-based adapter to filter irrele-vant nodes and edges, targeting efficient subgraph retrieval for textual graph understanding. Similarly, KG-based rea-soning frameworks like ToG Sun et al. [2024] utilize LLMs as agents to execute path-searching algorithms (e.g., beam search) over structured facts. Beyond path reasoning, recent graph-based indexing approaches leverage LLM-generated structures to capture global information. GraphRAG Edge 

et al. [2024] constructs hierarchical community summaries to answer global queries but suffers from high indexing costs. In contrast, LightRAG Guo et al. [2025] introduces a dual-level retrieval paradigm incorporating both graph structures and vector representations. However, these indexing-focused approaches primarily address retrieval efficiency and cover-age, but are less equipped to handle scenarios where poten-tially useful reasoning paths are discarded during search. 

2.3 Text-Graph Integration Paradigms 

The integration of text and graphs has become a promising direction for robust RAG systems. Early approaches typi-cally employed unidirectional enhancement strategies. For instance, KG-Infused RAG utilizes graph entities to expand queries for text retrieval, while frameworks like KG 2RAG 

Zhu et al. [2025] adopt a ”Semantic-to-Graph” paradigm, us-ing text seeds from initial semantic retrieval to expand graph components. However, these methods often face a ”unidi-rectional bottleneck,” where the strengths of one modality do not actively feed back to correct or complete the other in real-time. To overcome these limitations, recent frameworks have moved toward cross-source validation. Think-on-Graph 2.0 (ToG-2) Ma et al. [2025] introduces a tight-coupling Figure 2: The overall architecture of TGS-RAG. The framework operates in three phases: (1) Knowledge Base Construction , where text chunks and entities are mapped in a unified vector DB; (2) Bidirectional Synergistic Retrieval , the core stage utilizing Semantic Beam Search to accumulate a Visited Memory containing both selected and pruned nodes. This memory facilitates Graph-Guided Re-ranking via       

> Global Voting and enables Text-Guided Path Completion by resurrecting pruned orphan entities from memory to bridge logical gaps; and (3) Generation , synthesizing the refined evidence.

paradigm that iteratively alternates between KG-based graph retrieval and document-based context retrieval, using text ev-idence to prune graph paths and graph structures to guide text retrieval. While TGS-RAG shares the high-level goal of mu-tual verification, the underlying mechanisms differ substan-tially. ToG-2 follows a subtractive strategy, repeatedly prun-ing and re-expanding the search space through costly itera-tive retrieval. In contrast, TGS-RAG adopts an additive strat-egy via Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging, which treats pruning as postponement rather than elimination and directly resurrects pruned paths from the semantic beam search his-tory. This retrospective repair mechanism enables efficient recovery of logical chains that are difficult to preserve un-der sparse graph connectivity and search-time pruning with-out additional database queries. 

## 3 The TGS-RAG Framework 

As illustrated in Figure 2, TGS-RAG is designed as a two-stage framework that tightly integrates unstructured text and structured knowledge graphs for retrieval-augmented reason-ing. It consists of an offline Knowledge Base Construction 

stage, responsible for extracting and fusing knowledge from unstructured documents; and an online Bidirectional Syn-ergistic Retrieval stage, which performs mutual verification and enhancement between text and graph evidence during in-ference. 

3.1 Knowledge Base Construction 

Given an unstructured document corpus C, TGS-RAG con-structs a unified knowledge base through an offline process-ing pipeline. We leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) to extract salient entities E and their semantic relations R (see extraction prompt in Appendix A.1), forming a global knowl-edge graph G = ( E, R ).Crucially, we establish a bidirectional mapping M be-tween the text corpus C and the knowledge graph G. Each relational triplet in G is explicitly linked to its originating text chunks, while each text chunk is annotated with the en-tities and relations it contains. This mapping transforms the knowledge graph from a standalone structure into a reasoning interface over text. Formally, the knowledge base is defined as a triplet: 

KB = ( C, G, M ) (1) where M represents the bidirectional links between C and G.This unified and interconnected knowledge base serves as the foundation for the proposed bidirectional enhanced retrieval framework. 

3.2 Dual-Channel Initial Retrieval 

Given a user query q, TGS-RAG first extracts a set of query-relevant entity mentions using an LLM. These entities are em-bedded to obtain vectors vE , which are then used to retrieve a seed entity set Eseed from the knowledge graph G.Starting from Eseed , TGS-RAG performs two complemen-tary retrieval processes in parallel: a Text Channel and a Graph Channel. This dual-channel design intentionally cap-tures heterogeneous evidence signals that exhibit different failure modes. • Text Channel : This channel performs standard seman-tic retrieval to quickly recall textual evidence directly related to the user query. We use the query vector vqFigure 3: Illustration of the Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging algorithm. The process operates in three steps: (1) The Visited Memory :Semantic Beam Search generates a set of Active Paths (Pinitial , blue nodes) while implicitly storing pruned nodes in the Visited Memory       

> (Evisited , grey area); (2) Contextual Recall : Contextual clues from retrieved text chunks ( Cinitial ) perform a Contextual Scan to identify relevant but pruned ”orphan entities”; (3) Path Resurrection : The pruning decision is reversed, and the Resurrected Path (pbridge , orange) connecting the resurrected entity to the main subgraph is recovered without additional database queries.

of user query q to perform vector indexing on the text chunk collection C, retrieving the initial text set Cinitial 

with the highest similarity to vq .• Graph Channel : Starting from the seed entity set 

Eseed , the Semantic Beam Search algorithm (see Algo-rithm 1 in Appendix B) computes, at each hop, the co-sine similarity between the embeddings of neighboring nodes and the query vector vq . Only the top-K (Beam Width) most semantically relevant paths are retained for the next expansion step. This heuristic pruning ensures that the retrieval focuses on the semantic neighborhood of the query, yielding a high-quality path set Pinitial 

within a preset depth d.The outcome of this stage is two heterogeneous evidence sets: Cinitial , which emphasizes semantic recall, and Pinitial ,which captures structured reasoning paths. 

3.3 Synergistic Fusion and Enhancement 

After obtaining the initial text evidence Cinitial and graph path set Pinitial , the TGS-RAG introduces a bidirectional scoring and discovery mechanism that enables mutual ver-ification and refinement of information. This process in-cludes two enhancement directions: Graph-to-Text and Text-to-Graph .

Graph-to-Text Synergy 

This process utilizes structured knowledge from the graph channel to guide the rediscovery and re-ranking of text evi-dence, rather than relying only on surface-level similarity to the query. 1. Chunk Recommendation : We aggregate all entities visited during the Semantic Beam Search (including those in pruned paths) to form a global visited set 

Evisited . These entities act as ”recommenders” to ”vote” for their source text chunks. The graph-recommended chunks are merged with Cinitial to create a broader can-didate pool Ccandidate , allowing text chunks that have low semantic similarity but are structurally relevant to be recalled. 2. Chunk Re-ranking : We calculate a recommendation score Rec (c) for each text chunk c ∈ Ccandidate , pro-portional to the number of entities recommending it. The final score Score f inal (c) is a weighted fusion of its orig-inal semantic similarity and the graph recommendation score: 

Score final (c) = α · Norm  sim (vq , v c)

+ (1 − α) · Norm  Rec (c) (2) where α is a hyperparameter balancing the two scores. 

Text-to-Graph Synergy 

This process utilizes the rich contextual information in the text channel to verify and enhance the structured paths dis-covered in the graph channel. As illustrated in Figure 3, this involves confirming existing paths and resurrecting pruned connections. For each path p ∈ Pinitial , we first calculate a base qual-ity score Score base (p) based on the semantic similarity of its components to the query q and their structural importance. 1. Path Confirmation : The path is validated by check-ing the intersection of entities on the path and entities contained in Cinitial . If a path receives support from text evidence (i.e., its entities appear in the retrieved text chunks), its score is boosted: 

Score conf (p) = Score base (p)+ ϵ · | Entities (p) ∩ Entities (Cinitial )| (3) where ϵ is the weight for text confirmation reward. 2. Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging : To discover potential knowledge ignored by the initial path prun-ing, we define Orphan Entities Eorphan as key entities that are activated by the retrieved text evidence Cinitial 

but are absent from the initially selected graph paths 

Pinitial . Instead of performing a costly new search or re-expansion, we leverage the Visited Memory as a de-ferred reasoning buffer . If an orphan entity exists in the visited but pruned nodes, the original pruning decision is reversed by directly replaying its stored path, thereby Dataset Method Retrieval Metrics Generation Strict Hit Rate (%) Recall (%) Precision (%) Support F1 (%) LLM Judge Acc (%) MuSiQue                                                               

> Naive RAG 14.23 43.96 21.17 28.11 21.51 Hybrid RAG 14.23 43.98 21.18 28.13 21.56 GraphRAG (Local) 30.70 59.62 7.19 12.59 40.67 LightRAG (Max) 33.54 60.44 20.23 18.58 40.81
> KG 2RAG 9.10 31.02 11.50 15.61 15.06
> TGS-RAG (Ours) 34.84 62.01 24.85 20.60 41.37 HotpotQA
> Naive RAG 45.01 62.48 26.99 38.56 59.41 Hybrid RAG 46.05 65.45 27.62 39.42 61.92 GraphRAG (Local) 55.78 70.15 10.11 20.85 71.79 LightRAG (Max) 60.55 72.04 10.23 15.58 72.09
> KG 2RAG 38.83 58.92 16.49 25.40 60.46
> TGS-RAG 62.00 77.55 27.41 26.06 79.99
> Table 1: Main results on MuSiQue and HotpotQA datasets. Retrieval performance is evaluated using Provenance Mapping. Generation quality is evaluated by DeepSeek-V3.2 as a Judge.

resurrecting a valid reasoning chain without additional database queries. We check if any orphan entity exists in the set of visited nodes that were pruned during the beam selection (detailed procedure in Algorithm 2, Ap-pendix B). If found, the path leading to this orphan entity is ”resurrected” as a bridge path pbridge . This mecha-nism efficiently recovers logical connections that are se-mantically distant but contextually bridged by the text, without incurring additional database query overhead. 

3.4 Context Consolidation and Answer Generation 

After precise scoring and ranking, the Top-K paths PT op −K

and text chunks CT op −K are selected. Each PT op −K is for-matted into clear natural language reasoning chains. If sup-ported by pbridge , these bridging paths are also appended as supporting metadata. Finally, the consolidated context of 

PT op −K and CT op −K , along with the original query q, is submitted to the LLM to generate a logically coherent and evidence-grounded answer. 

## 4 Experiments 

In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of TGS-RAG against state-of-the-art retrieval paradigms. We aim to validate the effectiveness of our bidirectional synergy mechanism in resolving the ”information island” problem in-herent in multi-hop reasoning tasks. 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Datasets 

We utilize two widely recognized benchmarks for multi-hop question answering: • MuSiQue-Ans Trivedi et al. [2022]: A dataset char-acterized by connected reasoning chains (typically 2-4 hops) and low lexical overlap between connected docu-ments. It serves as the primary testbed for our ”Orphan Entity Bridging” mechanism. • HotpotQA (Distractor) Yang et al. [2018]: A dataset requiring reasoning over two supporting documents amidst logically irrelevant but semantically similar dis-tractor documents. 

Implementation Details 

To ensure a robust and cost-effective experimental environ-ment, we employ GPT-4o-mini as the backbone LLM for all tasks, including Knowledge Graph construction, entity extraction, and final answer generation. For semantic rep-resentation, we utilize Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B [Zhang et al. , 2025] as the unified embedding model for all queries, text chunks, and graph entities. For evaluation, we utilize DeepSeek-V3.2 [Liu et al. , 2024] as an impartial LLM-as-a-Judge [Li et al. , 2025] (evaluation prompt provided in Ap-pendix A.4). We instruct DeepSeek-V3.2 to evaluate seman-tic equivalence between the generated answer and the ground truth, accounting for valid aliases while penalizing hallucina-tions. 

Baselines 

We compare TGS-RAG with three categories of retrieval methods. All baselines are implemented following their orig-inal configurations, utilizing identical LLM backbones (GPT-4o-mini) and consistent text chunking strategies to ensure a fair comparison. Detailed implementation parameters and sensitivity analyses are provided in Appendix C and E. • Naive RAG: Standard dense retrieval using vector sim-ilarity. • Hybrid RAG (Dense+Sparse Text Retrieval): A com-bination of dense vector retrieval and sparse keyword re-trieval (BM25/TF-IDF) fused via Reciprocal Rank Fu-sion (RRF) Cormack et al. [2009]. • Graph-centric Methods: We evaluate state-of-the-art graph retrieval systems, including GraphRAG [Edge 

et al. , 2024] and LightRAG [Guo et al. , 2025]. To rigorously benchmark the performance ceiling of each method, we employ their most comprehensive retrieval modes and include their associated textual evidence or community summaries where applicable: ”Local Dataset Method Token Usage Embedding LLM Prompt LLM Completion Total Cost MuSiQue 

Naive RAG 54,735 1,756,984 13,461 1,825,180 Hybrid RAG 54,735 1,758,189 13,437 1,826,361 GraphRAG (Local) 51,845 13,908,681 554,681 14,515,224 LightRAG (Max) 174,024 16,541,984 374,635 17,090,643 

KG 2RAG 1,795,495 909,001 10,213 2,714,709 

TGS-RAG 78,030 5,113,149 252,224 5,443,403 HotpotQA 

Naive RAG 2,202,470 59,485,904 345,673 62,034,047 Hybrid RAG 2,280,240 63,283,087 346,239 65,909,566 GraphRAG (Local) 1,475,556 634,239,236 10,674,261 646,389,053 LightRAG (Max) 4,574,224 746,163,808 7,163,934 757,901,966 

KG 2RAG 2,119,623 41,072,699 398,399 43,590,721 

TGS-RAG 3,406,165 187,692,537 26,438,352 217,537,053 

> Table 2: Efficiency and token usage analysis. Detailed breakdown of token consumption across MuSiQue and HotpotQA datasets. Grouping by dataset allows for a direct comparison of computational costs among different retrieval paradigms.

Search” for GraphRAG (focusing on entity-centric rea-soning) and ”Max” mode for LightRAG (integrating both global and local signals). Additionally, we compare against KG 2RAG [Zhu et al. , 2025] as a representative of semantic-to-graph expansion paradigms. For methods with explicit text chunk retrieval, we fix the text chunk top-k to k = 5 .

Evaluation Metrics 

To rigorously assess both retrieval completeness and genera-tion accuracy, we employ a multi-dimensional metric system. 

Retrieval Scope with Provenance Mapping. Unlike stan-dard RAG which only retrieves text chunks, TGS-RAG re-trieves both structured paths and unstructured chunks. To en-sure a fair comparison with document-level ground truth, we define the set of retrieved documents Dret as the union of explicit document retrieval and implicit graph provenance: 

Dret = Dchunks ∪ { doc | ∃ e ∈ Pgraph , doc ∈ Source (e)}

(4) where Dchunks denotes the source documents of the top-k

retrieved text chunks, and Source (e) represents the source documents of entities contained in the retrieved graph paths 

Pgraph . Based on Dret , we calculate Strict Hit Rate (SHR) ,the percentage of queries where Dret contains all ground truth supporting documents, and Support F1 , measuring the quality of evidence. Because graph-based retrieval ex-pands evidence through entity-to-document provenance, its retrieved document set is typically broader than chunk-only baselines, making Support F1 a conservative metric that may be lower despite stronger structural coverage. 

Generation Quality (LLM-as-a-Judge). Traditional string-matching metrics (e.g., Exact Match) often penal-ize correct but verbose answers. Therefore, we adopt 

LLM Judge Accuracy , employing DeepSeek-V3.2 to judge whether the generated response contains the correct information specified in the gold answer. 

4.2 Main Results 

Performance Comparison 

Table 1 presents a comprehensive evaluation of retrieval and generation performance across MuSiQue and HotpotQA benchmarks. 

Limitations of Shallow Hybridization and Unidirectional Expansion. The results reveal critical bottlenecks in exist-ing retrieval paradigms. As observed in the MuSiQue dataset, 

Hybrid RAG yields a Strict Hit Rate (14.23%) and Judge Ac-curacy (21.56%) virtually identical to Naive RAG. This stag-nation confirms that the primary challenge in multi-hop rea-soning is not lexical mismatch—which keyword search ad-dresses—but structural disconnection . Hybrid methods fail to bridge the gap when documents share no lexical overlap but are logically linked. Similarly, KG 2RAG underperforms significantly (9.10% Hit Rate on MuSiQue), demonstrating the fragility of unidirectional ”semantic-to-graph” expansion; if the initial semantic retrieval misses key anchor points, the subsequent graph reasoning collapses due to the lack of a feedback loop. 

The Precision-Recall Trade-off in Graph Baselines. 

While heavy graph-based approaches like GraphRAG and 

LightRAG achieve competitive recall, they suffer from se-vere precision degradation. On HotpotQA, both methods ex-hibit extremely low retrieval precision ( ≈10%), compared to 27.41% for TGS-RAG. This indicates an information over-load phenomenon: these systems retrieve excessive, logically loosely related graph components (e.g., entire communities), which introduces significant noise into the context window. Consequently, despite high recall, their generation accuracy (LLM Judge) is compromised by the distraction of irrelevant evidence. 

Superiority of TGS-RAG. TGS-RAG establishes a new state-of-the-art by effectively balancing retrieval scope and precision. On MuSiQue, it achieves a Strict Hit Rate of 

34.84% , more than doubling the performance of Hybrid RAG. On HotpotQA, it attains the highest Strict Hit Rate, Variant SHR (%) Recall (%) Prec (%) F1 (%) TGS-RAG (Full) 62.00 77.55 27.41 26.06         

> w/o Bridging 47.82 68.16 22.74 23.46 w/o Re-ranking 52.65 70.31 23.88 24.08
> Table 3: Ablation study on HotpotQA. Detailed impact of removing synergy modules.

Recall, and Judge Accuracy, reaching a Judge Accuracy of 

79.99% despite a conservative Support F1 of 26.06% under broader graph provenance. Unlike baselines that trade preci-sion for recall, TGS-RAG utilizes the bidirectional synergy to filter out pseudo-evidence while resurrecting subtle logical links, providing the LLM with a concise and rigorous reason-ing chain. 

4.3 Efficiency Analysis 

Table 2 details the computational costs associated with each paradigm. A comparative analysis highlights the superior cost-effectiveness of our framework. 

Prohibitive Costs of Global Indexing. Graph-based global indexing methods impose a prohibitive computational bur-den. LightRAG and GraphRAG incur astronomical token usage (e.g., over 757M tokens for LightRAG on HotpotQA vs. 62M for Naive RAG), primarily driven by the exhaustive construction of community summaries and dual-level indices. This massive overhead renders them impractical for dynamic or large-scale knowledge bases where frequent updates are required. 

Optimal Pareto Frontier of TGS-RAG. TGS-RAG achieves an optimal trade-off between performance and ef-ficiency. While it incurs a moderate cost increase over Naive RAG ( ≈3x) to support graph reasoning, it is drastically more efficient than global graph methods—consuming only 37% 

of the tokens used by GraphRAG on MuSiQue and less than 30% of LightRAG on HotpotQA. This efficiency stems from our algorithmic design: instead of pre-computing ex-pensive global summaries, TGS-RAG employs an on-demand 

retrieval strategy. The Semantic Beam Search and Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging selectively explore and resur-rect only contextually relevant paths during inference, avoid-ing the redundant processing of the entire graph structure. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

To verify the contribution of each module in our bidirectional synergy mechanism, we conducted an ablation study on the 

HotpotQA dataset. We developed two variants: • w/o Graph-to-Text (Re-ranking): Disables the Global Voting mechanism. Text chunks are ranked solely by vector similarity. • w/o Text-to-Graph (Bridging): Disables the Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging . The system relies solely on the initial graph paths found by beam search. As shown in Table 3, removing the Graph-Guided Re-ranking module leads to a decline in Strict Hit Rate to 

52.65% and Support F1 to 24.08% . This indicates that with-out structured filtering, the retriever struggles to distinguish between semantically similar distractors and true supporting facts, thereby reducing the precision and overall quality of the evidence context. A concrete example of this ”Semantic Drift” and how our synergy mechanism resolves it is analyzed in Appendix D. Similarly, removing the Bridging module results in the most significant performance degradation, with Strict Hit Rate dropping sharply from 62.00% to 47.82% . This con-firms that standard graph traversal may fail when potentially valid evidence nodes are pruned early, whereas our memory-based resurrection mechanism effectively recovers these ”or-phan” connections. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We have proposed TGS-RAG , a bidirectional text–graph syn-ergistic framework designed to resolve the isolation between unstructured textual evidence and structured graph-based rea-soning. By modeling retrieval as a collaborative process, TGS-RAG effectively bridges the ”Information Island” gap inherent in multi-hop reasoning tasks. The framework introduces two complementary enhance-ment channels: Graph-Guided Re-ranking leverages struc-tured logic to filter semantic noise from text retrieval, while 

Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging utilizes textual context to validate and complete graph reasoning paths. Acritical innovation is the use of ”visited memory” to resur-rect pruned paths, which recovers potentially useful logical links that were previously discarded during search, without the computational overhead of iterative expansion. Extensive experiments on MuSiQue and HotpotQA demonstrate that TGS-RAG consistently outperforms strong text-based, graph-based, and hybrid baselines. Our results indicate that shallow hybridization is insufficient; instead, ef-fective multi-hop reasoning requires structured and unstruc-tured evidence to mutually verify and correct each other. No-tably, TGS-RAG achieves this state-of-the-art performance with significantly lower token consumption compared to global graph retrieval methods. Overall, this work under-scores the importance of bidirectional synergy and provides a scalable foundation for integrating symbolic structure with neural representations in LLMs. A Prompt Templates 

To ensure reproducibility, we provide the core prompt tem-plates used in TGS-RAG . All prompts are engineered to be concise and task-specific for the underlying LLM (GPT-4o-mini). 

A.1 Entity & Relation Extraction Prompt 

This prompt guides the LLM to extract structured knowledge triplets from unstructured text chunks during the Knowledge Base Construction phase. 

System Prompt: Knowledge Graph Specialist 

—Role— 

You are a Knowledge Graph Specialist responsible for extracting entities and rela-tionships from the input text. 

—Instructions— 

1. Entity Extraction: Identify clearly defined and meaningful entities. • Fields: – name : The name of the entity (Title Case). 

– type : Categorize the entity using the provided Entity types .If none apply, classify as other .

– description : A concise description based solely on the text. • Target Format (JSON Lines): 

{"type": "entity", "name": "...", "category": "...", "desc": "..." }

2. Relationship Extraction: Identify direct binary relationships between previ-ously extracted entities. • Rule: Decompose complex N-ary relationships into binary pairs. • Fields: – source / target : The exact names of the source and target enti-ties. 

– keywords : Comma-separated high-level keywords summarizing the relation. 

– description : A concise explanation of the connection. • Target Format (JSON Lines): 

{"type": "relation", "source": "...", "target": "...", "keywords": ["..."], "desc": "..." }

3. General Rules: 

• Output all entities first, followed by all relationships. • Use third-person perspective. Avoid pronouns like ’I’, ’you’, ’this arti-cle’. • The entire output must be in {language }. Proper nouns should be retained in their original language. • End Signal: Output the literal string <|COMPLETE|> on the final line. 

—Real Data to be Processed— 

¡Input¿ Entity types: [{entity types }]

Text: 

{input text }

A.2 Query Entity Extraction Prompt 

This prompt is used in the online retrieval stage. To handle complex user intents and avoid keyword noise, we employ detailed exclusion rules and few-shot demonstrations to guide the LLM in identifying the core search targets. 

User Prompt: Query Analysis 

—Role— 

You are a highly intelligent query analysis engine for a Retrieval-Augmented Gen-eration (RAG) system. 

—Goal— 

Accurately identify and extract key concepts or entities that serve as the core sub-jects of the user’s query. 

—Definition of Core Entity— 

A core entity is a noun or proper noun with clear referential meaning. It usually belongs to: • Specific Objects: Person names, locations, organizations, models (e.g., ”iPhone 15”). • Abstract Concepts: Technical terms, theories, strategies (e.g., ”RoHS di-

rective”). • Broad Themes: The central topic of vague queries (e.g., extract ”market-ing” from ”tell me about marketing”). 

—Exclusion Criteria (Do NOT Extract)— 

1. User Intent Verbs: Words indicating what the user wants to do (e.g., ”com-pare”, ”find”, ”list”, ”describe”). 2. Functional Words: Stop words or general nouns acting as sentence structures (e.g., ”information”, ”detail”, ”introduction”). 

—Few-Shot Demonstrations— 

1. User: ”Help me introduce a fighter.” 

Output: ["fighter"] (Ignore ”introduce”) 2. User: ”What is the relationship between RoHS and peak forward current?” 

Output: ["RoHS", "peak forward current"] 

3. User: ”Hello, how are you?” 

Output: [] (No core entities) 

—Task— 

User Query: "[User Query String]" 

Extracted Entities (JSON Format): 

A.3 Final Answer Generation Prompt 

This prompt synthesizes the retrieved graph paths and text chunks. It includes strict instructions to prioritize evidence over prior knowledge and explicitly handle missing informa-tion to prevent hallucinations. 

User Prompt: Context Consolidation 

—Role— 

You are a knowledgeable and logically rigorous AI knowledge assistant. 

—Core Instructions— 

1. Strict Adherence to Context: Your answer must be completely and solely 

based on the provided evidence. You are strictly prohibited from using inter-nal prior knowledge. 2. Synthesis & Reasoning: 

• Use Knowledge Graph Paths to establish the logical backbone (rela-tionships between A and B). • Use Textual Evidence to fill in specific details (dates, descriptions, at-tributes). • If a logical link is provided in the graph but missing in the text (or vice versa), synthesize them to form a complete chain. 3. Anti-Hallucination: If the provided context does not contain sufficient infor-mation to answer the question, explicitly state: ”Based on the provided mate-rials, I cannot answer this question.” 

4. Structure: Organize the response clearly using headings, bullet points, or Markdown tables for comparisons. 

—Context Provided— ## Knowledge Graph Paths 

[Path 1: Entity A --(relation)--> Entity B--(relation)--> Entity C] [Path 2: ...] 

## Textual Evidence 

[Evidence 1 (Source: Doc A): "...specific content text..."] [Evidence 2: ...] 

—Task— 

User’s Original Question: "[User Query String]" 

Your Answer: 

A.4 LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation Prompt 

To evaluate generation quality, we adopt an LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm to assess whether a generated answer contains the correct information specified by the gold answer. 

System Prompt: Answer Correctness Judge 

You are an impartial and strict judge evaluating the correctness of a generated answer compared to a gold standard answer. Your task is to determine if the ”Gen-erated Answer” contains the correct information specified in the ”Gold Answer”. 

Rules: 

1. Answer-Centric Evaluation: Judge solely based on whether the core answer required by the Gold Answer is correctly provided. Additional correct or irrel-evant information should not affect the judgement unless it introduces contra-dictions. 2. Semantic Equivalence: If the generated answer is verbose but clearly contains the correct core entity, fact, or conclusion, mark it as CORRECT .3. Aliases: Treat any provided aliases of the Gold Answer as equally valid correct answers. 4. Hallucination or Contradiction: If the generated answer contains incorrect facts or conflicts with the Gold Answer, mark it as INCORRECT .5. Non-Answering: If the generated answer states uncertainty or fails to provide the required answer, mark it as INCORRECT .  

> Output Format (JSON):
> {"is_correct": boolean, "reason": "Short explanation." }

## B Algorithm Pseudocode 

We present the pseudocode for the core algorithms of TGS-RAG : Semantic Beam Search (which constructs the Visited Memory) and Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging. 

Algorithm 1 Semantic Beam Search with Visited Memory 

Require: Query embedding q, Seed Entities Eseed , Knowl-edge Graph G, Beam Width K, Max Depth D

Ensure: Top Paths Pinitial , Visited Memory Mvisited 

1: Initialize Pcurr ← { [e] | e ∈ Eseed }

2: Initialize Mvisited ← ∅ 

3: for each e ∈ Eseed do 

4: Mvisited [e] ← { path : [ e], score : 1 .0} { Initialize memory with seeds }

5: end for 

6: for d = 1 to D do 

7: Candidates ← ∅ 

8: for each path p ∈ Pcurr do 

9: ecurr ← plast {Last node in path }

10: N ← G.GetNeighbors (ecurr ) {Limit by edge weight if necessary }

11: for each neighbor n ∈ N do 

12: if n / ∈ p then {Cycle prevention }

13: n ← GetEmbedding (n)

14: sim ← CosineSim (n, q)

15: pnew ← p + [ n] {Key Step: Track all explored nodes and their paths in Memory }

16: if n / ∈ M visited or sim > Mvisited [n].score 

then 

17: Mvisited [n] ← { path : pnew , score : sim }

18: end if 

19: Candidates ← Candidates ∪ { (pnew , sim )}

20: end if 

21: end for 

22: end for 

23: Pcurr ← SelectTopK (Candidates, K ) {Pruning step: keep only top-K paths }

24: end for 

25: return Pcurr , Mvisited 

Algorithm 2 Memory-based Orphan Entity Bridging 

Require: Retrieved Text Chunks Ctext , Visited Memory 

Mvisited , Initial Graph Paths Pinitial 

Ensure: Final Path Set Pf inal 

1: Etext ← ExtractEntityIds (Ctext )

2: Egraph ← S 

> p∈Pinitial

{e | e ∈ p}

3: Eorphan ← Etext \ Egraph {Identify entities present in text but missing from graph paths }

4: Pbridge ← ∅ 

5: for each orphan entity e ∈ Eorphan do 

6: if e ∈ M visited then 

7: precovered ← Mvisited [e].path {Zero-overhead bridging: Resurrect path from memory }

8: Pbridge ← Pbridge ∪ { precovered }

9: end if 

10: end for 

11: Pf inal ← Pinitial ∪ Pbridge 

12: return Pf inal 

## C Implementation Details 

This section provides implementation details of TGS-RAG to ensure reproducibility, including hyperparameter settings, model choices, and system configuration. All parameters re-ported here correspond to the best-performing configuration identified through the sensitivity analysis described in Ap-pendix E. 

C.1 Hyperparameters 

Table 4 summarizes the hyperparameters used in all experi-ments unless otherwise specified. These parameters govern the bidirectional synergy between text and graph retrieval, in-cluding semantic–structural balancing, graph search behav-ior, and memory-based orphan entity bridging. 

Table 4: Hyperparameter Settings for TGS-RAG 

Parameter Symbol Value 

Chunk Synergy Weight α 0.5 Text Confirmation Bonus ϵ 0.4 Beam Search Width K 20 Search Depth d 3Max Neighbors per Node Nmax 30 Top Orphan Entities Bridged ko 3Seed Density Bonus γ 0.4 Entity Degree Weight λe 0.01 Relation Degree Weight λr 0.01 Top Recommended Chunks kr 4Embedding Dimension Dim 1024 The chunk synergy weight α controls the balance between semantic similarity and graph-based recommendation during text re-ranking, while the text confirmation bonus ϵ deter-mines the strength of textual evidence in validating graph paths. The remaining parameters primarily affect search effi-ciency and structural bias and are shown to have limited sen-sitivity within reasonable ranges. C.2 Environment and Models 

• Large Language Model (LLM): GPT-4o-mini is used for all LLM-invoked components, including entity ex-traction, knowledge graph construction, and final answer generation. • Embedding Model: We employ the Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B model with an output dimension of 1024 for encoding queries, text chunks, and graph entities. • Database: All text chunks, graph entities, relations, and their embeddings are stored in PostgreSQL with the 

pgvector extension, enabling unified vector-based re-trieval over both structured and unstructured data. • Execution Environment: Experiments are conducted on a standard Linux server with 32GB RAM. No GPU acceleration is required, as all model inference is per-formed via API-based services. 

C.3 Reproducibility Notes 

To ensure reproducibility and stable evaluation: • All entity extraction results from user queries are cached to eliminate stochastic variation from repeated LLM calls. • Hyperparameter tuning is conducted on a dynamically balanced validation subset of MuSiQue, with deter-ministic sampling to guarantee consistent comparisons across configurations. • All reported results use the same fixed hyperparame-ter configuration identified as optimal in the sensitivity analysis. 

## D Case Study: Overcoming Semantic Drift 

To intuitively demonstrate the effectiveness of our bidirec-tional synergy, we analyze a representative multi-hop query from the MuSiQue dataset where baseline methods failed due to semantic ambiguity. As shown in Figure 4, the baseline method falls into the ”keyword trap,” retrieving semantically similar but logically irrelevant entities (various people named ”Jones”). In con-trast, TGS-RAG successfully bridges the logical gap. The 

Semantic Beam Search discovered that ”Abigail Breslin” is the structural intersection of the two movies. Crucially, this structural signal allowed the system to ”resurrect” the cor-rect textual evidence that was otherwise buried by the vec-tor retriever, validating the necessity of our graph-guided re-ranking mechanism. 

## E Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

We analyze the sensitivity of TGS-RAG to key hyperparam-eters that govern the bidirectional synergy between text and graph retrieval. All experiments are conducted on a dynam-ically balanced validation subset of MuSiQue, and perfor-mance is measured using Strict Hit Rate. 

Case Study: Semantic Drift vs. Structural Bridging                                 

> Query: ”Which actress had roles in the movies ’Janie Jones’ and ’Signs’?”
> Baseline (w/o Synergy):
> •Retrieved Text: Chunks related to ”Caro Jones” ,”Shirley Jones” , and ”Madison Jones” .•Failure Cause: The vector retriever was misled by the high semantic density of the token ”Jones,” resulting in Semantic Drift .It retrieved entities sharing the surname but lacking logical connection to the movie ”Signs”. •Outcome: ”Cannot Answer” (Precision: 0.00).
> TGS-RAG (Ours):
> •Graph Path Discovery: Janie Jones cast
> −−−→Abigail Breslin cast
> ←−−−Signs
> •Mechanism: Although the text chunk for ”Abigail Bres-lin” initially had a lower semantic score than ”Caro Jones”,
> the Graph Channel identified her as a common neighbor
> (bridge node) connecting both query entities. •Synergy: The Graph-Guided Re-ranking module boosted the priority of the ”Abigail Breslin” chunk, suppressing the irrel-evant ”Jones” family chunks. •Outcome: Correct Answer: ”Abigail Breslin” (Recall: 1.00).
> Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on a multi-hop query. While the baseline suffers from semantic drift (focusing on the surname ”Jones”), TGS-RAG leverages the graph structure to identify the true bridge entity (”Abigail Breslin”) that logically connects the two distinct movies, effectively correcting the retrieval focus.

Effect of Chunk Synergy Weight α. Varying the chunk synergy weight α exhibits a clear unimodal trend. Perfor-mance improves as α increases from 0.4 to 0.5 and degrades for larger values. This behavior reflects the trade-off be-tween semantic similarity and graph-based structural guid-ance: smaller α underweights structural signals, while larger 

α overemphasizes graph recommendations at the expense of semantic relevance. The variance across runs is consistently small, indicating stable behavior around the optimal region. 

Effect of Text Confirmation Bonus ϵ. The text confirma-tion bonus ϵ shows a threshold-and-saturation pattern. Perfor-mance remains largely unchanged for small values of ϵ and peaks around ϵ = 0 .4, after which further increases yield no additional benefit. This confirms that textual evidence is most effective when used for validating graph paths rather than ag-gressively promoting them. 

Beam Width and Search Depth. TGS-RAG demonstrates robustness to moderate variations in beam width K and search depth d. Increasing the search depth from d = 3 to 

d = 4 yields no observable improvement in retrieval per-formance, suggesting diminishing returns from deeper explo-ration. This robustness indicates that the proposed memory-based orphan entity bridging mechanism effectively recovers potentially valid reasoning chains discarded during search-time pruning. 

Pairwise Sensitivity of α and ϵ. We further analyze the joint effect of α and ϵ to assess parameter interaction stabil-ity. Results show that the optimal configuration ( α = 0 .5,

ϵ = 0 .4) is not an isolated point: neighboring combinations yield comparable performance with smooth degradation away from the optimum. This indicates that TGS-RAG does not rely on fragile parameter coupling and that its performance is stable across a contiguous region of the hyperparameter space. Overall, the selected configuration ( α = 0 .5, ϵ = 0 .4,

K = 20 , d = 3 ) achieves a favorable balance between ef-fectiveness and efficiency and is used throughout all experi-ments. 

## References 

Gordon V. Cormack, Charles L A Clarke, and Stefan Buettcher. Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods. In Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-search and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’09, page 758–759, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Associa-tion for Computing Machinery. Manuel Cossio. A comprehensive taxonomy of hallucinations in large language models. http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01781 ,2025. Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropoli-tansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 , 2024. Zirui Guo, Lianghao Xia, Yanhua Yu, Tu Ao, and Chao Huang. LightRAG: Simple and fast retrieval-augmented generation. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 10746–10761, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Xiaoxin He, Yijun Tian, Yifei Sun, Nitesh V. Chawla, Thomas Laurent, Yann LeCun, Xavier Bresson, and Bryan Hooi. G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation for textual graph understanding and question answering. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 132876– 132907. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Comput. Surv. , 55(12), March 2023. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu, editors, Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. Colbert: Efficient and ef-fective passage search via contextualized late interaction over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Infor-mation Retrieval , pages 39–48, 2020. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K¨ uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨ aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented genera-tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 33, pages 9459–9474. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. Dawei Li, Bohan Jiang, Liangjie Huang, Alimohammad Beigi, Chengshuai Zhao, Zhen Tan, Amrita Bhattachar-jee, Yuxuan Jiang, Canyu Chen, Tianhao Wu, et al. From generation to judgment: Opportunities and challenges of llm-as-a-judge. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2757–2791, 2025. Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024. Shengjie Ma, Chengjin Xu, Xuhui Jiang, Muzhi Li, Huaren Qu, Cehao Yang, Jiaxin Mao, and Jian Guo. Think-on-graph 2.0: Deep and faithful large language model rea-soning with knowledge-guided retrieval augmented gener-ation. In Y. Yue, A. Garg, N. Peng, F. Sha, and R. Yu, ed-itors, International Conference on Representation Learn-ing , volume 2025, pages 52782–52806, 2025. Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. Think-on-graph: Deep and respon-sible reasoning of large language model on knowledge graph. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2024. Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. MuSiQue: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , 2022. Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chi-ang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii, editors, Pro-ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Day-iheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models, 2025. Xiangrong Zhu, Yuexiang Xie, Yi Liu, Yaliang Li, and Wei Hu. Knowledge graph-guided retrieval augmented genera-tion. In NAACL , 2025.