Title: A Systematic Approach for Large Language Models Debugging

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23027v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:14:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# A Systematic Approach for Large Language Models Debugging 

Basel Shbita 1, Anna Lisa Gentile 1, Bing Zhang 1, Sungeun An 1, Shailja Thakur 2,Shubhi Asthana 1, Yi Zhou 1, Saptha Surendran 2, Farhan Ahmed 1, Rohan Kulkarni 2,Yuya Jeremy Ong 1, Chad DeLuca 1, Hima Patel 2

> 1

IBM Research, San Jose, CA, USA 

> 2

IBM Research, Bengaluru, India  

> {basel, annalisa.gentile, bing.zhang, sungeun.an, shailja.thakur}@ibm.com ,sasthan@us.ibm.com ,
> {yi.zhou, saptha.surendran, farhan.ahmed, rohan-kulkarni7, yuyajong}@ibm.com ,
> delucac@us.ibm.com, himapatel@in.ibm.com

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have become central to modern AI workflows, powering applications from open-ended text generation to complex agent-based reasoning. However, debugging these models remains a persistent challenge due to their opaque and probabilis-tic nature and the difficulty of diagnosing er-rors across diverse tasks and settings. This pa-per introduces a systematic approach for LLM debugging that treats models as observable systems, providing structured, model-agnostic methods from issue detection to model refine-ment. By unifying evaluation, interpretability, and error-analysis practices, our approach en-ables practitioners to iteratively diagnose model weaknesses, refine prompts and model param-eters, and adapt data for fine-tuning or assess-ment, while remaining effective in contexts where standardized benchmarks and evalua-tion criteria are lacking. We argue that such a structured methodology not only accelerates troubleshooting but also fosters reproducibility, transparency, and scalability in the deployment of LLM-based systems. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have rapidly ad-vanced the capabilities of artificial intelligence, en-abling breakthroughs in natural language under-standing and reasoning, and achieving impressive performance in a wide range of tasks (Naveed et al., 2025; Matarazzo and Torlone, 2025; Yang et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019). LLMs underpin a wide range of workflows, from domain-specific fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022) pipelines to agent-based systems capable of multi-step plan-ning and tool use (Wu et al., 2025). Despite their success, LLMs present unique challenges: their outputs are inherently probabilistic, their behavior often opaque, and their “failures” difficult to iso-late (Gao et al., 2025). As reliance on LLMs grows, the ability to systematically identify, analyze, and resolve issues becomes a critical requirement. Traditional debugging practices fall short in ad-dressing the complexities of LLMs. Metrics de-signed for well-defined tasks rarely capture the nuances of open-ended generation, where multiple valid outputs exist (Chang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). Benchmark-driven eval-uation, while useful, is often limited in scope and may not reflect the conditions under which models are deployed. In emerging or low-resource do-mains, standardized benchmarks may be absent altogether, making ad-hoc debugging insufficient and obscuring the root causes of model failures. This paper proposes a systematic approach for LLM debugging that treats models as observable systems, enabling structured and model-agnostic workflows for issue detection, interpretability, and error analysis. By unifying these practices into an integrated framework, practitioners can itera-tively diagnose weaknesses, refine prompts, and adapt data for fine-tuning or evaluation, even in environments where conventional resources such as evaluation data are unavailable. This approach standardizes debugging as a reproducible, scalable engineering practice applicable across tasks, do-mains, and deployment settings. Our key contributions are threefold: (i) we in-troduce a four-phase debugging framework for di-agnosing and improving LLM performance, struc-tured around the stages of issue detection, evidence gathering, behavioral analysis, and iterative refine-ment, (ii) we demonstrate the applicability of this framework across three major categories of tasks: well-defined tasks, underspecified tasks, and agen-tic or workflow-level applications, and (iii) we ground the framework in a set of representative use cases drawn from practical LLM development scenarios, showing how it enables systematic de-bugging and refinement in diverse settings. 1

> arXiv:2604.23027v1 [cs.AI] 24 Apr 2026

2 Related Work 

Recent work on LLM evaluation emphasizes mov-ing beyond traditional metrics such as accuracy, BLEU, and ROUGE (Chang et al., 2024). For open-ended generation, exact-match and string-based metrics are brittle, and existing evaluation paradigms often fail to cover real-world conditions or adapt to new domains (Srivastava et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2025). To address these challenges, LLM-as-a-Judge (LLMaJ) approaches inject semantic reasoning into evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), but introduce concerns around bias and consistency (Li et al., 2025). Beyond single-turn interactions, AI agents present distinct debug-ging challenges, as failures cascade across trajec-tories with complex prompts, multi-step reasoning, and dynamic tool use (Majdoub et al., 2025). Exist-ing techniques include self-verification, reflection-based methods (Huang et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023), and supervised approaches (Xiang et al., 2025). However, no existing framework forms a closed loop from behavioral analysis to prompt re-design and data augmentation in agentic settings. Our work bridges this gap by introducing a uni-fied, model-agnostic framework that operational-izes LLM debugging as an engineering practice. 

3 Systematic Debugging of LLMs 

Issue Detection. As shown in Figure 1, debug-ging begins when a model produces outputs that are unsatisfactory or deviate from expectations, which can manifest as drops in benchmark performance, inconsistent behavior across similar prompts, or failures in reasoning and workflow execution. The goal at this stage is to characterize the issue in prac-tical terms so it can be systematically addressed, rather than relying on ad-hoc observations. If benchmarks exist, they provide the quickest entry point: profiling across standard suites in the Open LLM Leaderboard (Fourrier et al., 2023, 2024) or specialized benchmarks such as RULER (Hsieh et al., 2024) for context length or ALERT (Tedeschi et al., 2024) for safety often reveals systematic weaknesses. Crucially, issue detection is not about fully diagnosing root causes but about localizing where failures are most visible, creating a focused starting point for evidence gathering and analysis. 

Evidence Gathering. After an issue has been detected, the next step is to ensure that sufficient evidence is available to support structured analysis. This phase is about assembling the necessary pre-requisites, including evaluation data, criteria, and metrics, which will make later behavioral analysis meaningful. The first question is whether eval-uation data or benchmark sets are available. If such resources exist, they form the natural starting point. When they are absent, practitioners should construct a small evaluation set manually and, if necessary, expand it synthetically to ensure a min-imal evidence base. One effective strategy here is to employ Scalable Synthetic Data Generation (SDG) (foundation-model-stack, 2025), an open-source general-purpose LLM-wrapper framework designed for producing large quantities of synthetic data using in-context examples. For agentic workflows or tool-calling, trajecto-ries become the key evidence: agent runs, tool calls, and reasoning steps should be logged and broken into interpretable units such as individual tool calls or reasoning segments, enabling isola-tion of recurring failure modes and alignment with frameworks such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2023). For non-agentic cases, the relevant question is whether the task is well-defined. For tasks with unambigu-ous correctness criteria (e.g., multiple-choice QA or exact string match), existing evaluation data can be applied directly. For tasks that are underspec-ified, however, evaluation criteria or metrics may be missing. In such cases, practitioners should construct lightweight evaluators. Code-based val-idators can check for structural correctness, while LLMaJ rubric-driven criteria can approximate se-mantic adequacy. Even when approximate, evalua-tors ensure that the evidence gathered is systematic rather than anecdotal. At this point, practitioners decide whether the evidence base is sufficient or whether additional data or criteria must be gathered before proceeding with structured analysis. 

Behavioral Analysis. In this phase, the focus shifts to behavioral analysis, where collected evi-dence is examined to better understand model be-havior and its sources of error. The process follows a small number of decision points that guide which analyses are most informative. When evaluation results are available, they can be profiled system-atically along semantic (e.g., categories, domains) and structural (e.g., input length, format) dimen-sions; otherwise, practitioners collect new runs, outputs, prompts, or trajectory metadata to build an evidence base for analysis. The next step is to de-termine which type of analysis is most suitable. In 2Figure 1: Overview of our systematic debugging workflow. After detecting an issue, the process branches based on the available evidence, including benchmarks, task definition, and evaluation criteria. Structured analyses then guide refinements to prompts, hyperparameters, evaluation protocols, or training data, with each cycle feeding back into re-testing and continued iteration. 

settings where only external behavior is observable, a glass-ceiling test can identify data gaps: adding evaluation data to the training set and re-evaluating reveals whether failures stem from insufficient data coverage or deeper architectural limitations. When available, practitioners can assess token-level diagnostic signals, such as logits or statisti-cal measures including entropy, varentropy, confi-dence, and surprisal, which quantify model uncer-tainty and can reveal anomalies such as hesitation or overfitting to narrow patterns. By indicating whether confidence is well-calibrated or systemati-cally skewed, these signals provide a quantitative view of sequence processing and can guide refine-ment by highlighting where targeted data augmen-tation or diagnostic fine-tuning is most likely to yield improvements. Beyond static analysis, fine-tuning itself can be used diagnostically: by adding targeted data and observing behavioral changes under different regimes—such as Low-Rank Adap-tation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022), quantized LoRA (QLoRA) (Dettmers et al., 2023), activated LoRA (ALoRA) (Greenewald et al., 2025), or full fine-tuning with varied data mixtures—practitioners can probe whether failures stem from data coverage gaps or deeper architectural limitations, enabling more principled refinements in the next phase. 

Iterative Refinement. Insights from behavioral analysis guide corrective strategies in the final phase of the debugging cycle. The objective is both to mitigate observed failures and to test hypotheses about their causes. Interventions typically target three areas: content, stability, and data. Content issues can be addressed through prompt refinement, adjusting structure or examples to steer outputs. Stability issues often respond to hyperparameter tuning, such as modifying decoding strategies or temperature. When failures reflect gaps in evalua-tion or training data, updating evaluation protocols or adapting data through curation, augmentation, 3or fine-tuning provides the most direct path to im-provement. This phase is not a terminal step but a loop: refinements are introduced, the model is re-tested, and new evidence is gathered. The cycle continues until performance reaches an acceptable level of accuracy, reliability, and stability. 

4 Use Cases 

4.1 Well-Defined Tasks 

We refer to well-defined tasks as those where (i) evaluation criteria are precise, (ii) correctness can be judged unambiguously, and (iii) evaluation benchmarks are available. Debugging tends to fo-cus on systematic weaknesses in the data or model configuration, with fine-tuning often providing ef-fective remedies. 

Natural Language to GraphQL (NL2GQL). 

We evaluated the task of generating GraphQL (Quiña-Mera et al., 2023) queries, a well-defined problem with clear correctness criteria: (i) generate the query from a natural language description, (ii) execute against adatabase, and (iii) verify the result. Unlike text-to-SQL (Zhang et al., 2023, 2024; Gao et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024), GraphQL is less studied but has a public benchmark (Kesarwani et al., 2024) that provides 10K labeled training samples. Using Granite-3.1-8B-Instruct (Granite Team, 2024) as a test model, we found initial accuracy around 20%, with prompt optimization raising it only to 27%. A representative failure case is provided in Appendix A.1. A glass-ceiling test 

confirmed the gap was due to lack of training exposure, since the model reached 96% accuracy once evaluation data were included in training. We then proceeded to fine-tune the models in two different ways: (i) vanilla fine-tuning , with a small (10K) amount of manually curated labeled data, obtained from (Kesarwani et al., 2024): this improved accuracy by ~30%, achieving an overall 50% accuracy, and (ii) data-mixture fine-tuning approach, where the same 10K GraphQL samples were injected into a larger (~1M) generic and technical (math, coding, etc.) labeled data: this significantly improved performance by ~40%, achieving an overall 60% accuracy for the task. We also verified that the fine-tuning has no negative effect on the standard base models’ capabilities, i.e. does not generate catastrophic forgetting on other generic tasks. 

Temporal Reasoning. Another pervasive chal-lenge is observed with respect to complex tempo-ral tasks (Wei et al., 2025; Wang and Zhao, 2024; Tan et al., 2023; Mavromatis et al., 2021). These problems are often lengthy and involve complex temporal reasoning, yet still have clear correctness criteria that enable unambiguous assessment of crit-ical gaps. For instance, common failure patterns in-clude BC/AD era confusion, systematic off-by-one errors, and inconsistencies in day-of-week arith-metic. These issues are particularly evident and quantifiable using established benchmarks like Test of Time (ToT) (Fatemi et al., 2025). One example of a miscalculated time difference is provided in Appendix A.2. By investigating evaluation results to pinpoint domain-specific error patterns , these patterns serve as seeds for synthesizing targeted data augmentation. Through gap-augmented data synthesis and fine-tuning, we successfully boosted 

Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct accuracy on ToT by over 20 percentage points (from 25.4% to 48.9%). 

Fill-in-the-Middle (FIM). A concrete instance we encountered in practice that illustrates this cat-egory is Fill-in-the-Middle (FIM) code comple-tion, a fundamental capability for code assistance tools, requiring models to predict missing code segments given surrounding prefix and suffix con-text. We classify FIM as a well-defined task be-cause its evaluation can be carried out in a fully de-terministic manner using established benchmarks such as HumanEval-Infilling (Bavarian et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021), where metrics like PASS@1 

and PASS@10 offer precise and reproducible mea-surements. The correctness of model outputs can be unambiguously determined since the generated code is directly executable, allowing objective ver-ification. Using Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct as a test model, initial evaluations on HumanEval-Infilling revealed that the model struggled with this ca-pability. One such example is provided in Ap-pendix A.3. We conducted error pattern analy-sis and found that although generated code was largely correct, indentation and formatting were frequently misaligned. This analysis helped iden-tify the root cause of the failures, revealing a gap in the training data: the original dataset was split at logical code boundaries, so middle segments rarely contained indentation. Consequently, the model never learned to reproduce proper formatting. To address this, we regenerated the FIM dataset by randomly splitting code into prefix, middle, and 4suffix segments, thereby preserving natural inden-tation patterns. This systematic approach yielded substantial improvements across all completion sce-narios. By combining targeted error analysis with dataset reconstruction, FIM performance improved significantly on a tested model. Initial evaluations revealed PASS@1 scores as low as 0.15 for single-line tasks and even lower for multi-line (0.06) and random-span (0.015) cases. After fine-tuning its base model ( Granite-3.3-8B-Base ) on the regen-erated dataset, single-line tasks improved by 0.57 points (from 0.15 to 0.72), multi-line tasks by 0.39 points (from 0.06 to 0.45), and random-span tasks by 0.545 points (from 0.015 to 0.56). These gains confirm that structured error analysis and data re-generation can directly translate into measurable model improvements. 

4.2 Underspecified Tasks 

In these settings, tasks may appear measurable but existing benchmarks or evaluation criteria are in-complete, misaligned, or fail to capture the true quality of outputs. Debugging requires analyzing errors and refining the evaluation setup. 

Natural Language to Mermaid Sequence (NL2Mermaid). In the case an ill-defined task where natural language is used to generate Mer-maid (Sveidqvist et al., 2025) sequence diagrams, debugging began with recognition that existing evaluations were insufficient to capture model per-formance. Initial outputs revealed issues such as malformed syntax, missing activation handling, or ambiguous rendering of interactions. A representa-tive example is provided in Appendix A.4. Since no standardized benchmarks or evaluation criteria existed for this task, the first two phases of our framework (issue detection and evidence gather-ing) focused on clarifying what constitutes a “good” Mermaid diagram and constructing a reproducible evaluation. This involved defining error categories, collecting seed examples, and expanding them with synthetic variants using SDG (foundation-model-stack, 2025) to produce a dedicated benchmark, each pairing a natural language prompt with a gold-standard diagram. The benchmark scores mod-els across six criteria (i.e., syntax, mermaid-only output, logic, completeness, activation handling, error and status tracking) using two independent LLMaJ evaluators ( DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) and GPT-OSS-120B (OpenAI et al., 2025)). This benchmark is formalized in Mer-maidSeqBench (Shbita et al., 2025). By profil-ing model outputs across the new benchmark, we identified recurring weaknesses and systematically explored remedies. One effective intervention was the use of in-context examples, which guided the LLM toward more consistent syntax and adher-ence to task conventions. Results demonstrate that in-context examples substantially improved model performance: for instance, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) improved from an overall score of 64.63 to 80.58, and Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct from 46.96 to 73.90, validating both the benchmark and the debugging process. 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) QA. 

In some cases, poor performance arises from noisy benchmarks rather than the model itself. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) Question-Answering (QA) benchmarks suffer from noise: reference answers (especially LLM-generated) may be unreliable, LLMaJ evaluations may diverge from human judgment, and evaluation criteria are unclear. Noise detection begins with identifying performance gaps across tested models. When sev-eral models failed in the same subset of a bench-mark, the issue may originate from the bench-mark rather than the models (see example in Ap-pendix A.5). To investigate, model outputs can be compared against both subject-matter expert (SME) annotations and LLMaJ judgments. Differ-ences between SME and LLMaJ scores revealed judge noise, while comparisons across benchmarks showed that if a model performed well on simi-lar datasets but poorly on one, the problem was likely due to that benchmark rather than the model. Based on these findings, reference answers were re-examined, and the LLMaJ design was refined to better align with SME assessments. Table 1 summa-rizes model performance before and after noise res-olution, using Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) as LLMaJ with evaluation aligned to SME annotations, unreliable metrics removed, and additional judges added. 

4.3 Agentic and Workflow-Level Tasks 

For multi-step or agent-based applications, issues often surface at the trajectory level: tool calls may be misaligned with user goals, reasoning may fail midway, or outputs may be inconsistent across runs. Debugging here emphasizes trajectory anal-ysis and prompt refinement, with iterative loops across phases required to stabilize performance. 5Table 1: Performance comparison of RAG QA tasks before and after resolving noise. Metrics: Correctness (answer accuracy), Completeness (information coverage), Adherence (instruction following), RL-F (retrieval-level F1 score), RB-LLM (retrieval-based LLM evaluation), and Conciseness (response brevity).                                                            

> Model Phase Correctness Completeness Adherence RL-F RB-LLM Conciseness
> Granite-3.2-8B-Instruct Before 0.74 0.76 0.81 ---After 0.90 0.91 -0.95 0.85 0.23 Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct Before 0.71 0.72 0.91 ---After 0.87 0.89 -0.96 0.85 0.31 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct Before 0.69 0.71 0.75 ---After 0.83 0.86 -0.93 0.79 0.20 Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Before 0.70 0.70 0.84 ---After 0.84 0.85 -0.97 0.84 0.40

Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) workflow. 

To illustrate an agentic debugging scenario, we evaluated Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct on an internal SRE workflow where an agent was tasked with diagnosing and remediating incidents in a Kuber-netes environment and tested with models like GPT-OSS-120B and Mistral Medium (Mistral AI, 2025). The agent received alerts, queried logs and metrics, and recommended mitigation steps such as scal-ing resources or restarting services. Performance was evaluated using a rubric-based scoring system, where score of 6 indicates baseline performance (no improvement), 7 indicates minor improvement (e.g., clearer root cause attribution), while 8 indi-cates significant improvement (e.g., accurate prop-agation chains and effective remediation), and 9 indicates complete success (e.g., full resolution of the incident with minimal false positives). The agent was guided by a structured system prompt that defined its role, goals, constraints, and avail-able tools (e.g., NL2Kubectl , NL2Metrics ), em-phasizing structured reasoning and adherence to tool constraints. A representative example is pro-vided in Appendix A.6. The training data consisted of SRE incident logs and synthetic trajectories generated using SDG ,covering scenarios such as high-latency alerts, pod failures, network policy violations, and resource exhaustion. First, hallucinated tool calls emerged when the agent generated non-existent pod names or API invocations; these were mitigated by refin-ing prompt structure with tool descriptions and con-straints. Second, trajectory pathologies included redundant log queries, misaligned tool use, or pre-mature escalation; trajectory profiling and adaptive thresholds helped flag such failures, while prompt refinements clarified escalation and retry strategies. Third, dynamic thresholding adapted error toler-ances to reliability or relaxing constraints. Evaluation focused on root cause identification accuracy, trajectory efficiency, hallucination rate, and output stability. Post-optimization, the agent demonstrated improved generalization to unseen incident types (e.g., database connection failures) with minimal performance degradation on general tasks. Table 2 summarizes improvements: clearer root cause attribution, more accurate propagation tracing, and fewer incorrect tool calls. 

Table 2: Performance comparison of SRE debugging tasks before and after refinement.              

> Incident Key Changes in Output Score Trend
> 23 Improved root cause attri-bution; aligned propagation chains
> ↑from ∼6 to 8 1Trimmed root causes to cleaner causality
> ↔held at 6 3Additional propagation found in revised output
> ↑from 7 to 8

5 Conclusion 

This paper introduced a four-phase framework for systematically debugging LLMs, spanning issue detection, evidence gathering, behavioral analy-sis, and iterative refinement. We demonstrated the framework applies across three categories of tasks: well-defined (NL2GQL, Temporal Reason-ing, FIM), underspecified (NL2Mermaid, RAG QA), and workflows (SRE). These use cases show the framework supports debugging in diverse set-tings and provides a reproducible foundation for building LLM debugging infrastructure. By inte-grating evaluation, diagnostics, and refinement into a closed loop, the framework moves beyond best practices for real-world LLMs. This work estab-lishes LLM debugging as an engineering discipline for transparency and reliability, offering a blueprint for diagnosis and improvement of LLM systems. 6Limitations and Ethical Considerations 

Our proposed framework and approach have sev-eral important limitations and ethical considera-tions. First, while we demonstrate the methodol-ogy through use cases spanning well-defined tasks, underspecified tasks, and agentic workflows, these case studies are illustrative rather than exhaustive. They cannot capture the full diversity of settings in which LLM debugging is required, and large scale empirical validation across domains, languages, and deployment environments remains an open di-rection. Second, the decision to treat models as externally observable systems prioritizes general-ity and accessibility but limits diagnostic depth. Without access to training data provenance, archi-tectural details, or gradient-level signals beyond externally observable behavior, our approach can-not fully disentangle whether failures arise from model design, training distribution, or deployment conditions. This restricts its explanatory power compared to complete white box analyses. Finally, the framework makes use of LLMaJ and heuristic-based scorers for evaluation in underspecified and ill defined settings. While these methods enable progress in the absence of standardized bench-marks, they also introduce potential biases, incon-sistencies, and reproducibility challenges. These concerns are especially salient for safety critical ap-plications, where biased or unreliable evaluations may lead to harmful outcomes and where more rigorous, validated protocols are required. 

References 

Mohammad Bavarian, Heewoo Jun, Nikolas Tezak, John Schulman, Christine McLeavey, Jerry Tworek, and Mark Chen. 2022. Efficient training of lan-guage models to fill in the middle. Preprint ,arXiv:2207.14255. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, and 1 others. 2024. A survey on evaluation of large language models. 

ACM transactions on intelligent systems and technol-ogy , 15(3):1–45. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, and 39 others. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. Preprint , arXiv:2107.03374. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Deepseek-v3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.19437. Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:10088–10115. Bahare Fatemi, Mehran Kazemi, Anton Tsitsulin, Karishma Malkan, Jinyeong Yim, John Palowitch, Sungyong Seo, Jonathan Halcrow, and Bryan Per-ozzi. 2025. Test of time: A benchmark for evaluating LLMs on temporal reasoning. In The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations .foundation-model-stack. 2025. fms-dgt: Synthetic data generation for foundation models. https://github. com/foundation-model-stack/fms-dgt .Foundation Model Stack. 2025. fms-dgt: Synthetic data generation for foundation models. https://github. com/foundation-model-stack/fms-dgt . GitHub repository. Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Alina Lozovskaya, Konrad Szafer, and Thomas Wolf. 2023. OpenLLM Leaderboard V1. 

https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/ en/open_llm_leaderboard/archive .Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Alina Lozovskaya, Konrad Szafer, and Thomas Wolf. 2024. Open-LLM Leaderboard V2. https://huggingface. co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_ leaderboard .Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, Xiuyu Sun, Yichen Qian, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Text-to-sql empowered by large language models: A benchmark evaluation. Preprint , arXiv:2308.15363. Mingqi Gao, Xinyu Hu, Xunjian Yin, Jie Ruan, Xiao Pu, and Xiaojun Wan. 2025. Llm-based nlg evalua-tion: Current status and challenges. Computational Linguistics , pages 1–27. IBM Granite Team. 2024. Granite 3.0 language mod-els. URL: https://github.com/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-language-models .Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. 

7Kristjan Greenewald, Luis Lastras, Thomas Parnell, Vraj Shah, Lucian Popa, Giulio Zizzo, Chulaka Gu-nasekara, Ambrish Rawat, and David Cox. 2025. Ac-tivated lora: Fine-tuned llms for intrinsics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12397 .Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shan-tanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. 2024. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? 

Preprint , arXiv:2404.06654. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3. Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han. 2022. Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610 .Manish Kesarwani, Sambit Ghosh, Nitin Gupta, Shra-mona Chakraborty, Renuka Sindhgatta, Sameep Mehta, Carlos Eberhardt, and Dan Debrunner. 2024. GraphQL query generation: A large training and benchmarking dataset. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing: Industry Track , pages 1595–1607, Miami, Florida, US. Association for Computational Linguistics. Haitao Li, Qian Dong, Junjie Chen, Huixue Su, Yu-jia Zhou, Qingyao Ai, Ziyi Ye, and Yiqun Liu. 2024. Llms-as-judges: a comprehensive survey on llm-based evaluation methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05579 .Qingquan Li, Shaoyu Dou, Kailai Shao, Chao Chen, and Haixiang Hu. 2025. Evaluating scoring bias in llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22316 .Limin Ma, Ken Pu, and Ying Zhu. 2024. Evaluating llms for text-to-sql generation with complex sql work-load. Preprint , arXiv:2407.19517. Yacine Majdoub, Eya Ben Charrada, and Haifa Touati. 2025. Towards adaptive software agents for debug-ging. Preprint , arXiv:2504.18316. Andrea Matarazzo and Riccardo Torlone. 2025. A sur-vey on large language models with some insights on their capabilities and limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04040 .Costas Mavromatis, Prasanna Lakkur Subramanyam, Vassilis N. Ioannidis, Soji Adeshina, Phillip R. Howard, Tetiana Grinberg, Nagib Hakim, and George Karypis. 2021. Tempoqr: Temporal ques-tion reasoning over knowledge graphs. Preprint ,arXiv:2112.05785. Mistral AI. 2025. Medium is the new large. https:// mistral.ai/news/mistral-medium-3 . Blog post. Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad Usman, Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. 2025. A com-prehensive overview of large language models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ,16(5):1–72. Shiwen Ni, Guhong Chen, Shuaimin Li, Xuanang Chen, Siyi Li, Bingli Wang, Qiyao Wang, Xingjian Wang, Yifan Zhang, Liyang Fan, and 1 others. 2025. Asurvey on large language model benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15361 .OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, and 1 others. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-structions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Antonio Quiña-Mera, Pablo Fernandez, José María Gar-cía, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. 2023. Graphql: A systematic mapping study. ACM computing surveys ,55(10):1–35. Basel Shbita, Farhan Ahmed, and Chad DeLuca. 2025. Mermaidseqbench: An evaluation benchmark for llm-to-mermaid sequence diagram generation. In 

NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Evaluating the Evolving LLM Lifecycle: Benchmarks, Emergent Abilities, and Scaling .Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36:8634–8652. Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adri Garriga-Alonso, and 1 others. 2023. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions on machine learning research .Knut Sveidqvist, Sidharth Vinod, Ashish Jain, Neil Cu-zon, Tyler Liu, Alois Klink, Reda Al Sulais, Nikolay Rozhkov, Justin Greywolf, Steph Huynh, Matthieu Morel, Marc Faber, Yash Singh, Nacho Orlandoni, Per Brolin, and Mindaugas Laganeckas. 2025. Mer-maid: Javascript-based diagramming and charting tool. https://mermaid.js.org/ .Qingyu Tan, Hwee Tou Ng, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Towards benchmarking and improving the tempo-ral reasoning capability of large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2306.08952. 

8Simone Tedeschi, Felix Friedrich, Patrick Schramowski, Kristian Kersting, Roberto Navigli, Huu Nguyen, and Bo Li. 2024. Alert: A comprehensive benchmark for assessing large language models’ safety through red teaming. Preprint , arXiv:2404.08676. Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Aman-preet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A stick-ier benchmark for general-purpose language under-standing systems. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Ruiqi Wang, Jiyu Guo, Cuiyun Gao, Guodong Fan, Chun Yong Chong, and Xin Xia. 2025. Can llms replace human evaluators? an empirical study of llm-as-a-judge in software engineering. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 2(ISSTA):1955– 1977. Yuqing Wang and Yun Zhao. 2024. Tram: Benchmark-ing temporal reasoning for large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2310.00835. Shaohang Wei, Wei Li, Feifan Song, Wen Luo, Tianyi Zhuang, Haochen Tan, Zhijiang Guo, and Houfeng Wang. 2025. Time: A multi-level benchmark for temporal reasoning of llms in real-world scenarios. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.12891. Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yuyuan Liu, Min Xu, and Yueming Jin. 2025. Agentic reasoning: A stream-lined framework for enhancing llm reasoning with agentic tools. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 28489– 28503. Jinyu Xiang, Jiayi Zhang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Jinhao Tu, Xinbing Liang, Sirui Hong, Chenglin Wu, and Yuyu Luo. 2025. Self-supervised prompt opti-mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06855 .Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiao-tian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Shaochen Zhong, Bing Yin, and Xia Hu. 2024. Harnessing the power of llms in practice: A survey on chatgpt and beyond. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , 18(6):1–32. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Bin Zhang, Yuxiao Ye, Guoqing Du, Xiaoru Hu, Zhishuai Li, Sun Yang, Chi Harold Liu, Rui Zhao, Ziyue Li, and Hangyu Mao. 2024. Benchmark-ing the text-to-sql capability of large language models: A comprehensive evaluation. Preprint ,arXiv:2403.02951. Yi Zhang, Jan Deriu, George Katsogiannis-Meimarakis, Catherine Kosten, Georgia Koutrika, and Kurt Stockinger. 2023. Sciencebenchmark: A complex real-world benchmark for evaluating natural language to sql systems. Preprint , arXiv:2306.04743. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, and 1 others. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 36:46595–46623. 

A Use Cases Details and Examples 

A.1 Natural Language to GraphQL (NL2GQL) Use Case Details 

Listing 1 provides one full prompt example for an NL2GraphQL task. Listing 2 illustrates a faulty output we observed during evaluation.              

> You are an agent that is an expert in generating GraphQL
> ,→queries. Your task is to generate the GraphQL query API
> ,→request for a given the GraphQL reference schema and user
> ,→instructions in natural language. You must structure your
> ,→response with the following request format below, with the
> ,→name of the function being called `query MyQuery { ... } `
> ,→as the query name. You should not use any other name, other
> ,→than `query MyQuery { ... } `. YOU MUST FOLLOW THIS FORMAT. SCHEMA:
> ``` graphql interface census_details{ census_ranking: String population: Float }type City implements census_details{ area_km_2: Float city_id: Int! }extend type City { farm_competition: [Farm_competition] }type Competition_record { competition_id: Int! farm: Farm farm_competition: Farm_competition farm_id: Int! }type Farm { farm_id: Int! }extend type Farm { competition_record: [Competition_record] }type Farm_competition { city: City competition_id: Int! competition_record: [Competition_record] host_city_id: Int hosts: String }type Query { city(city_id: Int!): City }
> ```
> Write a single graphql query which MUST start with `query
> ,→MyQuery { `, with no explanation or additional text, just
> ,→the query, to answer the following question: Give me the area km square and the hosts of the farm
> ,→competition for city with id 1.

Listing 1: Example of full prompt for the request: “Give me the area km square and the hosts of the farm competition for city with id 1”. 

Listing 3 shows the correct expected output, which was achieved after fine-tuning the same model. We use Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) to fine-tune Granite-3.1-8B-Instruct (Granite Team, 92024) base model, using a train batch size of 4, 2 gradient accumulation steps, 2 epochs, a learning rate of 10 −4, cosine scheduler type, and a max se-quence length of 4,096. The test and training data for this task were obtained from (Kesarwani et al., 2024). The dataset includes 10,940 training triples spanning 185 cross-source data stores and 957 test triples over 14 data stores. Each triple consists of a GraphQL schema, a GraphQL query operation, and a corresponding natural language query. The dataset has been predominantly manually created, with natural language paraphrasing, and carefully validated, requiring approximately 1,200 person-hours. 

> {city(city_id: 1) { farm_competition(competition_id: 1) { host_city_id hosts }}}

Listing 2: Example of incorrect query generated by an open sourced LLM for the request: “Give me the area km square and the hosts of the farm competition for city with id 1”. 

> query MyQuery { city(city_id: 1) { area_km_2 farm_competition { hosts }}}

Listing 3: Example of expected GraphQL query for the request: “Give me the area km square and the hosts of the farm competition for city with id 1”. 

As shown in Table 3, the initial test is a zero-shot test of the selected base model ( Granite-3.1-8B-Instruct ) on the task. The accuracy was around 20%. Performing empirical prompt optimization raised the accuracy to 27%. We executed a glass-ceiling test by adding test data in the fine-tuning step. The model reached 96% accuracy. Finally, 

vanilla fine-tuning with the 10K data samples achieved an overall ∼48% accuracy. As a proof of generalization check, we also verified that the fine-tuning has no negative ef-fect on the standard base models’ capabilities, i.e., it does not generate catastrophic forgetting on other generic tasks. We tested the original model (Granite-3.1-8B-Instruct ) and the LoRA fine-tuned version on the most prominent leaderboard bench-marks for LLMs, obtaining comparable results and observed no degradation in the scores. 

Table 3: Performance results for Granite-3.1-8B-Instruct (Granite Team, 2024), fine tuned using 10K data points (Kesarwani et al., 2024). 

Test Variant Accuracy 

Zero Hop 82.71% One Hop 53.81% Two Hop 25.00% FL Zero Hop 41.94% FL One Hop 35.53% FL Two Hop 11.11% Overall 47.77% 

A.2 Temporal Reasoning Use Case Details 

While base models are capable of solving simple temporal problems, they frequently fail to reach the correct answer in specific categories. Listings 4 and 5 illustrate a representative user prompt and its erroneous response, respectively. In this example, the base model was asked to compute the exact time difference between two timestamps. The generated output incorrectly expressed the duration using a fractional day and mismatched hours, highlighting a recurring weakness in temporal reasoning tasks.   

> Calculate the time difference between 5:00AM Nov 19, 2024 and
> ,→6:00AM Nov 25, 2024. List the answer using days, hours, and
> ,→minutes.

Listing 4: Prompt text for a temporal reasoning task.  

> The time difference between 5:00 AM Nov 19, 2024, and 6:00 AM
> ,→Nov 25, 2024, is 0.75 days, 6 hours, and 0 minutes.

Listing 5: Erroneous model output for the temporal reasoning task. 

To address this task, we materialized an “Expert Assistant” system prompt that mandates a struc-tured response format. Models are required to gen-erate a detailed intermediate steps trace enclosed in <think> tags, followed by the final result in 

<answer> tags. Listing 6 illustrates the full prompt structure, whereas Listing 7 shows the desired cor-rect behavior achieved after training on our curated synthetic data.     

> You are an expert assistant specialized in temporal reasoning.
> ,→Your task is to analyze events, times, durations, and
> ,→their relationships to answer questions accurately. Always
> ,→reason step by step, explicitly tracking time points,
> ,→intervals, and order of events. Answer Format: <think> {{Your step-by-step reasoning here}} </think> <answer>{{Final answer here}}</answer>

Listing 6: Example of a full prompt for a temporal reasoning task using an Expert Assistant persona. 

10 ASSISTANT: <think> 1. From Nov 19, 5:00 AM to Nov 25, 5:00 AM is exactly 6 days. 2. From Nov 25, 5:00 AM to Nov 25, 6:00 AM is 1 hour. 3. Total duration is 6 days and 1 hour. </think> <answer>6 days, 1 hour, and 0 minutes</answer> 

Listing 7: Correct (desired) assistant output for the temporal reasoning task in Listing 4 showing the CoT reasoning chain. 

Listings 8 and 9 show another example of a user prompt and the correct response, which we achieved after training on our curated synthetic data, respectively.   

> If today is 2024-02-28, the museum exhibition opened on
> ,→2022-11-15. How many months have passed between the opening
> ,→date and today?

Listing 8: Prompt text for a temporal reasoning task.        

> ASSISTANT: <think> First calculate the number of whole calendar months between
> ,→the two dates. From 2022-11-15 to 2024-02-15 is exactly 15
> ,→full months (2 years = 24 months, then subtract the 9-month
> ,→offset from November to February: 24 - 9 = 15). Since the
> ,→end date, 2024-02-28, is after the 15-month anniversary (
> ,→the 15th day of February), those 15 months are fully
> ,→completed. Therefore, 15 months have passed between the
> ,→opening date and today. </think> <answer>15</answer>

Listing 9: Correct expected assistant output for a calendar-based reasoning task in Listing 8 addressing identified gaps. 

We use Supervised Fine Tuning (SFT) to train the 

Granite-3.3-8B-Base (Granite Team, 2024) model using a learning rate of 10 −4, cosine scheduler, and a max sequence length of 4,096. The final dataset of 15,910 samples was synthesized using SDG (Foundation Model Stack, 2025). Generation was seeded using concepts targeting the following identified failure trends: (i) ToT-Arithmetic (Fatemi et al., 2025) categories based on poor-performing sections of the ToT benchmark: Schedule (27%), Trick (29%), Duration (12%), and Multi-op (8%), and (ii) Observed Error Patterns with specific gaps including “BC/AD Transition”, “Off-by-One/Two”, “Backwards Calculation”, “Day-of-Week”, “Large Timespan Arithmetic”, “Time Scaling”, and “Over-lap Logic”. The dataset was curated through a three-stage fil-tering process of 72,000 raw samples from Mistral-Large and GPT-OSS-120B which included: (i) con-sensus check between teacher models ensured ac-curacy, (ii) target model answerability via retaining samples where the base model (e.g., in this case 

Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct ) failed to provide a cor-rect answer, and (iii) CoT quality using an LLMaJ (Llama-3.3-70B ) evaluation of reasoning coherence and complexity (score ≥ 7/10 ). Looking at the ablation results in Table 4, the biggest takeaway is that being picky with our data pays off. By layering our filters—specifically checking if teachers agree (Filter 1), targeting things the model already struggles with (Filter 2), and ensuring the reasoning is high quality (Filter 3), we saw a steady climb in performance from 0.38 to 0.60 in the combined score Interestingly, different filters help in different ways: targeting “answerabil-ity” (A1) provided a massive boost in the Duration 

category, while adding quality checks (A3) proved to be the secret sauce for more nuanced Trick ques-tions. Ultimately, our “Full” pipeline (A5) proves that when we combine all three filters, we get a model that is significantly more well-rounded and capable across the board than the baseline. We verified that fine-tuning improved task-specific capabilities without degrading base model performance across leaderboards. Models main-tained comparable results across leaderboards (Safety, RAG, Multi-lingual) while specifically im-proving accuracy in the ToT_Arithmetic domain. 

A.3 Fill-in-the-Middle (FIM) Use Case Details 

In FIM tasks, the model must generate only the missing line of code at the marked location, with-out rewriting or altering the surrounding context. Listings 10, 11, and 12 illustrate an example where the model is required to generate only the missing line of code (a function definition).  

> <fim_prefix> from typing import List def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float)
> ,→-> bool: """ Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer than the given threshold. """ <fim_suffix> for idx2, elem2 in enumerate(numbers): if idx != idx2: distance = abs(elem - elem2) if distance < threshold: return True return False <fim_middle>

Listing 10: Prompt text for a Fill-in-the-Middle (FIM) task. 

> for elem in enumerate(numbers):\n

Listing 11: Erroneous model output filling the missing line incorrectly. 

> for idx, elem in enumerate(numbers):\n

Listing 12: Correct output filling the missing line in the FIM task. 

11 Table 4: Temporal reasoning performance breakdown on different categories of ToT-Arithmetic (Fatemi et al., 2025) tasks. Ablations test different combinations of filters applied on the synthesized data: Filter 1 (Final Answer Match), Filter 2 (Granite Answerability), and Filter 3 (Judge CoT+Answer Quality).                                                                        

> Model / Tasks Combined Add/Sub Compare Duration Multi_op Schedule Timezone Trick
> (n=1850) (n=350) (n=350) (n=200) (n=350) (n=250) (n=100) (n=250)
> Llama-3.1-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024) 0.36 0.47 0.81 0.11 0.06 0.15 0.54 0.36 Granite-3.3-8B-Instruct (Granite Team, 2024) 0.38 0.48 0.84 0.14 0.14 0.17 0.48 0.33
> Ablations (Granite-3.3-8B-Base-FT)
> A1: F2 (Answerability) 0.51 0.67 0.63 0.51 0.44 0.05 0.50 0.67 A2: F1+F2 (Match+Ans) 0.58 0.63 0.94 0.47 0.51 0.24 0.63 0.47 A3: F1+F3 (Match+Qual) 0.54 0.60 0.67 0.41 0.58 0.10 0.61 0.78
> A4: F2+F3 (Ans+Qual) 0.58 0.67 0.90 0.43 0.53 0.06 0.54 0.70 A5: F1+F2+F3 (Full) 0.60 0.65 0.93 0.48 0.49 0.27 0.57 0.70

Similarly to Listing 10, we adopt the struc-tured prompt format shown in Listing 13, where 

<fim_prefix> and <fim_suffix> delimit the pre-fix and suffix context, while <fim_middle> marks the missing span to be predicted. The model must emit only the missing middle segment such that: (i) the code is syntactically valid and executable where applicable, (ii) indentation/formatting is pre-served (critical for Python and whitespace-sensitive languages), and (iii) the completion is logically consistent with both prefix and suffix. 

<fim_prefix>{prefix}<fim_suffix>{suffix}< 

,→ fim_middle>{middle} 

Listing 13: FIM prompt template. 

Fine-tuning was performed on Granite-3.3-8B-Base with a maximum sequence length of 4,096 tokens, a learning rate of 10 −5, and trained for 1 epoch. We fine-tune on a regenerated multi-lingual FIM corpus designed to preserve natu-ral indentation and realistic code boundaries: (i) Python (150K samples), and (ii) Other languages (200K total) covering: Java, C++, Go, JavaScript, Rust, and TypeScript. Samples are randomly split into prefix , middle , and suffix segments. The dataset includes single-line , multi-line , and 

random-span cases. We evaluate on HumanEval-Infilling (Bavarian et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) using deterministic code execution with metrics 

PASS@1 and PASS@10 .We assessed robustness by evaluating across varying span lengths, including single-line, multi-line, and random-span cases, to ensure the model handles different infilling complexities. Addi-tionally, we verified formatting fidelity (e.g., in-dentation and code style) and confirmed that the model correctly localized completions using the 

<fim_middle> marker. Error analysis was per-formed to identify common failure patterns such as misaligned indentation and logical inconsistencies. 

A.4 Natural Language to Mermaid Sequence Diagram (NL2Mermaid) Use Case Example 

Listing 14 illustrates one representative NL2Mermaid test case showing the natural language input specification for that task. The listing shows the full input, including the purpose of the diagram, the main components, and the interactions in the form of an ordered sequence.    

> Purpose: Uploading Documents with Secure Storage Main Components: User, Mobile App, BFF, Azure AD Interactions: 1. User Action: User uploads a document through the mobile app.
> ,→
> 2. Mobile App: Sends the document along with the session token
> ,→to the BFF. 3. The BFF validates the token with Azure AD. 4. On successful upload, the BFF returns a confirmation to the
> ,→app. If the user is unauthorized or the file exceeds size
> ,→limits, an appropriate error is returned.

Listing 14: Natural language specification for “Uploading Documents with Secure Storage” task. 

Listing 15 shows the corresponding erroneous Mermaid syntax generated by the LLM. Here, the output diagram exhibited several issues that were recurrent across the dataset: inconsistent activation and deactivation markers, malformed or misplaced error-handling logic, and incomplete responses. 

> sequenceDiagram title Uploading Documents with Secure Storage participant User participant App as Mobile App participant BFF participant AAD as Azure AD User->>App: Select document & upload activate App App->>BFF: POST /upload (file, token) activate BFF BFF->>AAD: validate (token) activate AAD AAD-->>BFF: 200 OK deactivate App alt success BFF-->>Application: 201 Created App-->>User: Done deactivate BFF else unauthorized AAD-->>BFF: 401 Unauthorized BFF-->>App: 401

12 else too large BFF-->>App: 413 Payload Too Large end 

Listing 15: Mermaid syntax illustrating a faulty “Uploading Documents with Secure Storage” flow, showing activation inconsistencies, incorrect error-handling, and incomplete actor responses. 

A.5 RAG Benchmark Use Case Example 

In Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) tasks, the model should answer the question using only the provided information. This involves: (i) select-ing relevant content, (ii) handling multiple sources when more than one document is provided, and (iii) managing uncertainty when the model cannot find the answer within the given information. Listing 16 shows an example question with its reference answer. Listing 17 shows a case where the human annotation aligns with scores given by an LLMaJ, while Listing 18 shows a case where the human annotation does not fully align with the LLMaJ scores. In the latter example, the LLMaJ as-signs a perfect score even though some information is missing. 

Q: How are estimation methods applied in developing medical 

,→ costs payable estimates? A: In developing medical costs payable estimates, different 

,→ estimation methods are applied depending on the month for 

,→ which incurred claims are being estimated. 

Listing 16: Example question and reference answer (documents truncated due to page limits). 

Model Response 1: In developing medical costs payable 

,→ estimates, the company applies different estimation methods 

,→ depending on the month for which incurred claims are being 

,→ estimated. For the most recent two months, they estimate 

,→ claim costs incurred by applying trend factors, which 

,→ represent an estimate of claims expense based on recent 

,→ claims expense levels and healthcare trend levels. For 

,→ prior months, the company uses completion factors, 

,→ representing the average percentage of total incurred 

,→ claims paid through a given date after being incurred, 

,→ based on historical data. These completion factors are 

,→ applied to claims paid through the period-end date to 

,→ estimate the ultimate claim expense incurred for the period 

,→ . Actuarial estimates of incurred but not paid claim 

,→ liabilities are then determined by subtracting the actual 

,→ paid claims from the estimate of the ultimate incurred 

,→ claims. Human annotation: Discusses both "most recent two months" and 

,→ "prior months". LLMaJ scores: correctness 1.0, completeness 1.0 

Listing 17: Case where human annotation aligns with scores given by an LLMaJ. 

Model Response 2: In developing medical costs payable 

,→ estimates, different estimation methods are applied 

,→ depending on the month for which incurred claims are being 

,→ estimated. For the most recent two months, the estimate of 

,→ claim costs incurred is based on applying actuarial models 

,→ that require management to make certain judgments. These 

,→ include medical cost per member per month trend factors and 

,→ completion factors, which consider assumptions such as the 

,→ time from date of service to claim receipt, the impact of 

,→ actual care activity, and processing cycles. Human annotation: Missing completion factor for "prior months". 

,→

LLMaJ scores: correctness 1.0, completeness 1.0 

Listing 18: Case where human annotation does not fully align with scores given by an LLMaJ. 

A.6 Agentic Tooling Use Case for SRE 

Listing 19 presents a representative example of an SRE workflow evaluated under our systematic de-bugging framework. The task involves diagnosing and remediating a Kubernetes incident, where the agent must identify root causes, trace fault propaga-tion chains, and recommend mitigation steps. The example below illustrates a typical prompt and the agent’s reasoning trajectory, showing how struc-tured refinement improves accuracy and reduces hallucinations. 

You are sre_diagnosis_agent, a smart and capable tool-using 

,→ agent. Your primary goal is to diagnose IT incidents in 

,→ Kubernetes environments by identifying fault propagation 

,→ chains and root causes. Available tools: GetAlerts Tool: Retrieves current alerts. NL2Kubectl Tool: Executes kubectl commands (e.g., describe 

,→ pods, get logs). NL2Metrics Tool: Accesses Prometheus metrics. NL2Traces Tool: Gathers Jaeger traces. NL2Logs Tool: Retrieves Loki logs. Follow this format: Thought: [Your reasoning] Action: [Tool name] Action Input: {"query": "..."} Observation: [Result] Example procedure: Get current alerts. Investigate affected pods/services using NL2Kubectl. Analyze metrics/traces/logs for root causes. Iterate until all root causes are identified. Diagnose the incident: "Alert: High latency in frontend 

,→ service in app-xyz namespace." 

Listing 19: System prompt for the SRE diagnosis agent, defining its role, goals, constraints, and available tools. The prompt emphasizes structured reasoning, tool constraints, and the need to avoid assumptions. 

Listing 20 shows a representative trajectory of the agent’s reasoning and tool use. The agent be-gins by gathering alerts, then iteratively investi-gates pods, logs, and network configurations to isolate the root cause (in this case, a misconfigured service port). This trajectory underscores the value of struc-tured agent reasoning in diagnosing complex IT incidents. By adhering to tool-use constraints and prompt structure—avoiding hallucinations, redun-dant actions, and unsupported assumptions, the agent systematically narrows potential root causes and produces reliable diagnoses. The example also illustrates common challenges in SRE workflows, such as misconfigured services or restrictive net-work policies, and demonstrates how the debug-13 ging framework guides resolution through evidence gathering and refinement.         

> Thought: High latency alert in frontend. I will check the pod
> ,→status. Action: NL2Kubectl Tool Action Input: {"nl_query": "describe pod frontend-xyz-123 in
> ,→app-xyz"} Observation: Pod is Running, but logs show connection timeouts
> ,→to api-service. Thought: The issue may be with api-service. I will check its
> ,→configuration. Action: NL2Kubectl Tool Action Input: {"nl_query": "describe service api-service-xyz
> ,→in app-xyz"} Observation: Service exposes port 8080, but the app expects
> ,→port 9090. Thought: The root cause is a port mismatch. I will update the
> ,→service. Action: NL2Kubectl Tool Action Input: {"nl_query": "update service api-service-xyz to
> ,→expose port 9090"} Observation: Service updated. Latency alert resolved.

Listing 20: Agent trajectory for diagnosing high latency in the frontend service, illustrating iterative refinement and tool use. 

To address the issue, decoding parameters were set to ensure deterministic reasoning (tempera-ture=0.2, top-p=0.9, max tokens=1,024), and fine-tuning, where applied, used LoRA (rank=8, α=16) with a learning rate of 5 · 10 −5 to maintain effi-ciency and avoid overfitting. The data mixture for fine-tuning included 80% SRE-specific incident logs and 20% generic IT operations documentation to balance task-specific and general knowledge. Finally, the agent achieved a markedly lower hallu-cination rate and reduced repeat action frequency, reflecting measurable gains in both efficiency and precision, as presented in Section 4.3. 14