Title: Towards Self-Improving Error Diagnosis in Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17658v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:56:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Towards Self-Improving Error Diagnosis in Multi-Agent Systems 

Jiazheng Li 1* Emine Yilmaz 2,3∗ Bei Chen 2 Dieu-Thu Le 21King’s College London 2Amazon Alexa AI 3University College London 

jiazheng.li@kcl.ac.uk {eminey,chenbe,deule}@amazon.com 

Abstract 

Large Language Model (LLM)-based Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) enable complex problem-solving but introduce significant debugging challenges, characterized by long interaction traces, inter-agent dependencies, and delayed error manifestation. Existing diagnostic approaches often rely on expensive expert annotation or “LLM-as-a-judge” paradigms, which struggle to pinpoint decisive error steps within extended contexts. In this paper, we introduce ERROR PROBE ,a self-improving framework for semantic failure attribution that identifies responsible agents and the originating error step. The framework operates via a three-stage pipeline: (1) operationalizing the MAS failure taxonomy to detect local anomalies, (2) performing symptom-driven backward tracing to prune irrelevant context, and (3) employing aspecialized multi-agent team (Strategist, Investigator, Arbiter) to validate error hy-potheses through tool-grounded execution. Crucially, E RROR PROBE maintains a verified episodic memory that updates only when error patterns are confirmed by executable evidence, without the need for annotation. Experiments across the T RACER TRAJ and WHO &W HEN benchmarks demonstrate that ERROR PROBE significantly outperforms baselines, particularly in step-level localization, while the verified memory enables robust cross-domain transfer without retraining. 

1 Introduction 

Large language model (LLM)-based multi-agent systems (MAS) have demonstrated strong perfor-mance across diverse domains, from software en-gineering (Hong et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024) and web navigation (Yao et al., 2022a,b) to scien-tific reasoning (Gottweis et al., 2025), education (Li et al., 2025b) and tool use (Schick et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024). Their core appeal is simple: by           

> *Work done at Amazon Alexa AI.
> Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> TracerTraj Who&When Algo Who&When Hand
> Accuracy (%)
> LLM-as-a-Judge ERROR PROBE ERROR PROBE + Memory

Figure 1: Claude 3.7 Sonnet results on agent attribution and decisive-step localization. E RROR PROBE substan-tially improves step-level localization over LLM-as-a-Judge while maintaining competitive agent accuracy. Adding verified memory retains strong performance while enabling reuse across tasks without LLM training. 

decomposing a complex task into multiple steps and assigning specialized roles (e.g., architect, en-gineer, tester) (Li et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024; Yan et al., 2025), MAS can solve problems that often exceed the capacity of a single LLM call. This increased power of MAS creates a practi-cal debugging problem (Zhou et al., 2024; Cemri et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026, 2025b). Consider a common failure pattern: an architect introduces a subtle specification error, an engineer faithfully im-plements it, and a tester verifies the wrong behavior. The run may only fail many turns later, after multi-ple agents have built on the initial mistake. When this happens, practitioners face a central diagnostic question: “ which agent caused the failure, and at what step did the error originate? ”In this paper, we study failure attribution in MAS–given a multi-agent interaction trace and a failure symptom (e.g., a final wrong answer, an ex-ception, or unmet constraints), the goal is to iden-tify the responsible agent(s) and the originating 1

> arXiv:2604.17658v1 [cs.MA] 19 Apr 2026

turn/step (and optionally the failure type). This problem is challenging for several reasons unique to multi-agent settings: • Long interaction traces: Production MAS runs can span dozens to over a hundred turns, often ex-ceeding practical context windows (Zhang et al., 2026; Packer et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). • Delayed manifestation: Early mistakes may only surface much later, complicating causal at-tribution (Zhang et al., 2026, 2025b). • Inter-agent dependencies: Each agent condi-tions on prior agents’ outputs, creating long (and sometimes branching) causal chains (Wu et al., 2024). • Diverse failure modes: Failures range from specification errors to coordination breakdowns and verification gaps, each requiring different diagnostics (Cemri et al., 2025). Prior work on failure analysis in LLM-based MAS largely falls into three directions: First, taxonomy-driven studies such as the Multi-Agent System Taxonomy (MAST) (Cemri et al., 2025) provide a principled lens over diverse failure modes, but constructing and labeling failures re-quires substantial expert human annotation effort, which is expensive and difficult to scale to the vol-ume and length of real MAS traces (Cemri et al., 2025). Second, specialized tracers trained on cu-rated supervision can improve attribution perfor-mance, but they depend on costly data generation pipelines and may require continual retraining or adaptation as agent frameworks, trace distributions, and error types evolve (Zhang et al., 2026). Third, prompting a general LLM as a judge is attractive for its low overhead and broad applicability, yet current benchmarks show that judge-style meth-ods remain far from reliable for task-specific at-tribution. Especially for pinpointing the decisive error step in long, delayed-failure traces (Zhang et al., 2025b; Ma et al., 2025). Even training-free transfer mechanisms for judge localization can be sensitive to domain shift (Yu et al., 2026). These limitations motivate a self-evolving multi-agent diagnosis framework. By emulating human ex-pert debugging: decomposing the diagnosis into specialized roles for backward tracing, hypothesis generation, and tool-grounded verification, such a framework can manage the complexity of long interaction traces and improve attribution accuracy without sacrificing generality across evolving fail-ure modes (Zhuge et al., 2025). To tackle the above issues, we present ERROR -PROBE , a MAS framework for failure attribution. Given the raw interaction history (including inter-agent messages and tool outputs) and a description of the failure symptom (e.g., an exception or in-correct final answer), our framework identifies the responsible agent(s) and the earliest error-inducing step. ERROR PROBE performs symptom-driven backward tracing to selectively retrieve causally relevant earlier turns from long interactions, aug-ments the analysis with structured semantic signals from a lightweight detector that operationalizes the MAST failure taxonomy, and maintains a verified memory of reusable error/patch patterns that is up-dated only when patterns are confirmed through ex-ecutable evidence (e.g., successful reproduction via code sandboxes) and arbiter verification, improv-ing robustness while avoiding noisy accumulation under distribution shift. We evaluate E RROR PROBE on three bench-marks: T RACE TRAJ (Zhang et al., 2026) and two splits of W HO &W HEN (Zhang et al., 2025b), span-ning multiple multi-agent frameworks and task set-tings. Across baselines including LLM-as-a-judge and prior tracing-based approaches, E RROR PROBE 

improves both agent-level and step-level attribu-tion, with ablations showing that backward tracing, structured failure-mode cues, and verified memory each contribute complementary gains. Finally, we demonstrate that our verified memory design suc-cessfully enables cross-domain transfer, allowing patterns learned in one domain to improve attri-bution in another without the degradation seen in naive approaches. Our contributions are as follows: • We introduce ERROR PROBE , a framework for semantic failure attribution in LLM-based multi-agent systems that localizes responsible agent(s) and originating error steps. • We operationalize the MAST taxonomy (Cemri et al., 2025) into a lightweight detector that scans interaction traces for local anomalies (e.g., mis-alignment or verification gaps). These structural tags serve as heuristic priors to narrow the search space, providing interpretable, structured failure-mode signals to guide attribution. • We demonstrate effective cross-domain transfer with verified memory, overcoming the brittleness of prior methods that often require retraining or struggle with distribution shift. We show that patterns learned in one dataset (e.g., KodCode) improve diagnosis in another (e.g., TracerTraj), highlighting the importance of verification-aware 2memory management for robust generalization. 

2 Related Work 

Multi-Agent Error Attribution. A growing body of work addresses failure attribution in multi-agent systems, identifying responsible agents and error steps within interaction traces. Zhang et al. (2025b) formalize this problem, highlighting the difficulty of step-level localization. To enable scal-able supervision, Zhang et al. (2026) introduce au-tomated data construction via counterfactual re-play, while subsequent methods explore spectrum-style analysis (Ge et al., 2025), hierarchical con-text decomposition (Banerjee et al., 2025), and communication efficiency (Zhang et al., 2025a). Complementary research focuses on characterizing failures through taxonomies (Cemri et al., 2025), root-cause diagnosis benchmarks (Ma et al., 2025), and human-annotated debugging datasets (Desh-pande et al., 2025). Unlike prior methods that rely on heavy supervision, costly replay, or domain-sensitive caching (Yu et al., 2026), our work tar-gets semantic diagnosis effective on long, delayed-failure traces by combining backward tracing with structured failure-mode signals. 

LLM and Agent Evaluation. The “LLM-as-a-Judge” paradigm has become a standard for scal-able evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023), often en-hanced via chain-of-thought or explicit rubrics (Liu et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024). While recent stud-ies caution against potential biases in automated judges (Bavaresco et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025), the paradigm has expanded to “Agent-as-a-Judge,” which provides process-level feedback for agentic workflows (Zhuge et al., 2025). However, whereas standard judges typically produce scalar or pair-wise rankings, our setting requires causal localiza-tion. We therefore move beyond free-form judging to trace-level backward reasoning augmented with semantic verification. 

Self-Evolving Agents and Memory. Research on self-improving agents leverages verbal rein-forcement and memory. Early approaches utilize iterative reflection (Madaan et al., 2023) or episodic buffers (Shinn et al., 2023) to refine outputs. To support lifelong learning, systems have adopted skill libraries (Wang et al., 2024) and memory man-agement architectures (Park et al., 2023; Packer et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2025). Recent surveys pro-vide comprehensive taxonomies of agent memory mechanisms across forms, functions, and dynamics (Zhang et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2025). Self-evolving frameworks integrate these components to adapt agent behavior at test-time (Liang et al., 2026; He et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2026). Addressing the chal-lenge of memory corruption in these systems, we propose a verified-before-write update gate. This ensures that only patches supported by verification signals are committed, preventing drift while re-taining reusable error patterns. 

3 Problem Formulation 

We formalize the problem of Multi-Agent Failure Attribution as a sequential prediction task. Let 

T be the space of interaction traces generated by a multi-agent system. These traces consist of a chronological sequence of turn-based interactions, where each step records the sender identity (agent), the recipient, and the semantic content (e.g., natu-ral language messages, code blocks, or tool execu-tion outputs). A task instance is defined as a tuple 

(x, y ), where x ∈ T is a failed execution trace con-taining a sequence of messages and tool outputs 

x = [ m1, m 2, . . . , m L], and y = ( a∗, t ∗, f ∗) is the ground-truth attribution tuple consisting of: • The culprit agent a∗ responsible for the root cause. • The decisive error step t∗ ∈ [1 , L ], corre-sponding to the specific interaction mt∗ (e.g., a hallucinated instruction, incorrect parameter, or buggy code snippet) where the logic fault was first introduced, as opposed to where the failure symptom became visible. • For the failure mode f ∗, we specifically adopt the MAST taxonomy (Cemri et al., 2025). This framework organizes multi-agent failures into 14 error modes across three hierarchical fami-lies: 

– Specification Issues (FC1): Errors in the initial setup or prompts (e.g., Disobey Task Specification where constraints are violated, or Disobey Role Specification where an agent acts outside its assigned persona). 

– Misalignment (FC2): Failures in inter-agent coordination (e.g., Ignored Other Agent’s Input where context is lost be-tween turns, or Reasoning-Action Mis-match where the output contradicts the agent’s internal thought process). 

– Verification Failures (FC3): Flaws in the quality assurance process (e.g., No/Incomplete Verification where a Tester 3Failure Symptom  L  

> Phase 2: Multi-Agent LLMs Diagnosis Team
> Strategist
> LLM Agent
> Bug Checker
> Failure Hypothesis
> Generation
> Available Tool Box
> Code Exec Search Logic Prob
> Arbiter
> LLM Agent
> Investigator
> LLM Agent
> Phase 3: Verified Episodic Memory
> Update
> Verification Gate
> Provide Prior
> Knowledge
> Memory
> Verified Failure Reasons
> Raw Interaction Traces x
> Phase 1: Structural Decomposition & Pruning
> MAST-Guided Tagging
> Tag local anomalies
> Condensed Traces
> Backward Tracing
> Dependency Parsing
> Final Failure Analysis

Figure 2: Overview of E RROR PROBE . The system prunes long traces via dependency parsing, then employs a Strategist-Investigator-Arbiter team to diagnose the root cause, updating memory only upon successful verification. 

approves without testing, or Incorrect Verification where valid solutions are rejected). Standard evaluation typically treats this as an i.i.d. classification problem, maximizing the like-lihood P (y|x). However, real-world debugging is a continuous process where the diagnosis system should learn from past failures. We therefore define a Sequential Diagnosis setting: the system main-tains a mutable memory state Mi at step i. Given a stream of failure tasks {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 , the model pre-dicts ˆyi = F(xi; Mi−1) and subsequently updates its state: 

Mi ← Update (Mi−1, x i, ˆyi, Verify (ˆ yi)) . (1) Our objective is to maximize cumulative attribu-tion accuracy over the stream while minimizing memory size and false positive updates. 

4 The E RROR PROBE Framework 

To address the challenges of long contexts and de-layed error manifestation, E RROR PROBE operates via a three-stage pipeline: (1) Structural Decom-position via the MAST taxonomy, (2) Symptom-Driven Backward Tracing to prune irrelevant con-text, and (3) a Self-Evolving Multi-Agent Diagno-sis loop with verified memory. The overall archi-tecture is illustrated in Figure 2. 

4.1 MAST-Guided Structural Decomposition 

Raw interaction traces are often unstructured and noisy. To provide semantic grounding, we opera-tionalize the M AST taxonomy (defined in Section 3) into a lightweight signal detector. Instead of redefining the failure modes here, we focus on de-tecting their local symptoms. Rather than asking the model to diagnose x di-rectly, we first parse the trace to extract a structured representation Sx = {(agent t, role t, action t)}Lt=1 .Role ( role t) is the assigned persona (e.g., Architect ,

Software Engineer , Product Manager ) extracted from the system prompt. Action ( action t) is the semantic type of the turn (e.g., Natural Language Instruction , Tool Call , or Execution Output ). We then apply a taxonomy-conditioned prompt to tag potential local anomalies. Unlike the global fail-ure symptom provided as input (which indicates that the task failed), these tags identify where spe-cific step-level deviations occurred (e.g., a ’Tool output ignored’ warning at Step 5). These weak signals serve as heuristic priors for the subsequent reasoning agents, narrowing the search space from 

L steps to a smaller set of candidate regions. 

4.2 Symptom-Driven Backward Tracing 

A core challenge in MAS debugging is the distance between the root cause (e.g., a wrong parameter at 

t = 5 ) and the symptom (e.g., a crash at t = 50 ). Processing the full linear history often leads to “lost-in-the-middle” phenomena. Therefore, we implement a Backward Tracing 

mechanism that reconstructs the causal chain of the failure. Given a failure symptom at step L:1. Dependency Parsing: We construct a depen-dency graph G = (V, E ) where nodes are messages and edges represent information flow (e.g., Agent B cites Agent A’s output). 2. Recursive Pruning: Starting from the symp-tom node vL, we perform a breadth-first search on incoming edges to identify the Effective Re-ceptive Field of the error. 3. Context Compression: We mask unconnected branches (e.g., parallel sub-tasks that suc-ceeded), retaining only the causal lineage x′ ⊂

x.This condensed context x′ focuses the model’s at-tention on the agents and steps that actually influ-enced the failure, significantly reducing noise for the diagnosis agents. 44.3 Multi-Agent Diagnosis Architecture 

The diagnosis is executed by a team of three special-ized agents designed to mimic a human debugging workflow: hypothesis generation, verification, and adjudication. 

The Strategist (Evaluation Lead). This agent acts as the high-level planner. It receives the con-densed trace x′ and the structural tags from Sec-tion 4.1. Its goal is to formulate a set of Hypothe-ses H = {(sj , suspected_mode )}. To do this effi-ciently, the Strategist queries the long-term mem-ory M (see Section 4.4) to retrieve k historical failure patterns. In ‘cold start’ scenarios (empty memory) or when no semantically similar patterns are found, the Strategist gracefully degrades to first-principles reasoning, relying solely on the structural MAST tags and trace context. As the system encounters and verifies new failures, this memory naturally populates, progressively shifting the Strategist from zero-shot reasoning to pattern-aware diagnosis. 

The Investigator (Bug Checker). To combat the hallucination of error causes, the Investigator is strictly grounded in tool usage. For every hypoth-esis h ∈ H, it must produce evidence Eh. We provide a dedicated toolset: • CodeExec : Re-runs code snippets in a sandbox to confirm runtime errors. • LogicProbe : Verifies specific pre-/post-conditions (e.g., “Check if variable X in step t

matches the constraints in step t − 5”). The Investigator cannot simply state “The code is wrong”; it must generate a diff or an execution log proving the discrepancy. 

The Arbiter (Verifier). The Arbiter serves as the final decision gate. It aggregates the hypotheses and their corresponding evidence sets {(h, E h)},filters out hypotheses where Eh is empty or in-conclusive, and outputs the final prediction ˆy =(a, t, f ) with a confidence score c ∈ [0 , 1] . The Arbiter also decides whether the diagnosed pat-tern is novel and robust enough to be committed to memory, acting as the safeguard against memory corruption. 

4.4 Verified Episodic Memory 

To enable self-improvement while mitigating the risk of memory corruption under distribution shift, ERROR PROBE maintains a dynamic memory M of verified failure patterns. Unlike naive caching, we enforce a Strict Verification Gate to ensure only robust diagnoses are retained. 

Verification Gate. While the Arbiter evaluates evidence to render a verdict for the current task, the Verification Gate acts as a stricter filter for long-term retention. It ensures that only diagnoses with high-confidence, reproducible tool evidence are committed to memory. Formally, a new diagnosis 

ˆyt and its associated evidence Et are committed to the memory state Mt if and only if Verify (Et) ∧

ct > τ :

Mt = Mt−1 ∪ { (ˆ yt, E t, σ t)} (2) where Verify (Et) represents the success of the In-vestigator’s tool-grounded reproduction, ct is the Arbiter’s confidence, and τ is a set threshold. This prevents “hallucinated” error patterns from pollut-ing the diagnostic history. 

Verified Episodic Memory. To enable self-improvement while ensuring interpretability, E R-

> ROR

PROBE maintains a dynamic memory M of verified failure patterns. Each entry e ∈ M is stored as a tuple ⟨se, v e, σ e⟩. The structured signa-ture se comprises interpretable features extracted from the trace, including the detected MAST anomaly (e.g., step_repetition ), the specific tool 

or api endpoint involved, the abstracted argument types ( args ), and context slots ( ctx ) such as agent role or task domain. Associated with this signature is the diagnosis recipe ve, containing the canoni-cal error pattern and verification guard, and a set of meta-statistics σe that track recency, frequency, impact, and performance delta. 

Relevance Scoring & Retrieval. When diagnos-ing a new trace x, we construct a query signature 

sx and compute a relevance score that combines structural similarity with a quality-weighted RFI-∆

score: 

S(x, e ) = Sim (sx, se)

| {z }

> Structural Match

× SRFI (e)

| {z }

> Quality Score

(3) where Sim (·) computes a weighted match over sig-nature fields (requiring exact match on the MAST tag), and SRFI is a composite of recency, frequency, impact, and performance delta. To address the cold start problem, we apply a strict similarity threshold 

τret = 0 .75 . If max e Sim (x, e ) < τ ret , retrieval returns an empty set, and the Analyzer defaults to first-principles reasoning using only the MAST taxonomy. 5Algorithm 1 Self-Evolving Diagnosis Routine                                                     

> Require: Failed trace xt, Memory Mt−1
> Ensure: Diagnosis ˆy, Updated Memory Mt
> 1: Compression: x′
> t←BackwardTrace (xt,MastPriors )
> 2: Retrieval: P ← Retrieve (Mt−1, x ′
> t, k )
> 3: Plan: H←Strategist (x′
> t,P)
> 4: for hypothesis hin Hdo
> 5: Eh←Investigator (h, Tools )
> 6: end for
> 7: Verdict: (ˆ y, c, E )←Arbiter (H, {Eh})
> 8: if c≥τand Verify (E)then
> 9: Mt←Update (Mt−1,ˆy, E )
> 10: else
> 11: Mt← M t−1
> 12: end if
> 13: return ˆy

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate E RROR PROBE on three multi-agent failure attribution benchmarks (details in Appendix A). (i) TracerTraj : A code-generation subset of the T RACER TRAJ dataset (Zhang et al., 2026), featuring long-context traces with programmatically injected faults that provide precise, synthetic ground truth. (ii) Who&When-Algo : An organic failure dataset from Zhang et al. (2025b) collected from CaptainAgent, a sys-tem where agent teams are algorithmically gener-ated and dynamically tailored to each task. (iii) 

Who&When-Hand : A complementary set of or-ganic failures from MagenticOne (Zhang et al., 2025b), representing hand-crafted agent teams. 

Compared Methods. We compare four MAS er-ror localization methods, each instantiated with multiple backbone LLMs. LLM-as-a-Judge 

prompts a single LLM with the full trace and fail-ure description to directly output (ˆ a, ˆt), following prior judge-style work (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025b); we also eval-uate additional Who&When protocols ( all at once , step by step , binary search ) in Ap-pendix B.1. Agent-as-a-Judge (baseline) adopts the tool-augmented framework from Zhuge et al. (2025), where the evaluator is an autonomous agent equipped with specialized capabilities (e.g., file reading, code localization, and dependency graphing) to inspect the trajectory and verify in-termediate states, rather than relying solely on the static trace context. Agent-as-a-Judge (ours) is our full E RROR PROBE pipeline without the Veri-fied Episodic Memory module: we first perform MAST-guided decomposition and backward trac-ing to compress the trace, then run the Strategist– Investigator–Arbiter team to produce (ˆ a, ˆt). Agent-as-a-Judge (ours, with memory) additionally en-ables verified episodic memory, where tasks are processed as a stream and new patterns are com-mitted only when verification succeeds. All four methods are compared using Claude 3.7 Sonnet, GPT-OSS-120B, and Qwen 3 32B as backbone models. 1

Tasks and Metrics. Following our formulation in Section 3, we evaluate models on two predic-tion tasks: (1) agent-level attribution , where the system must identify the culprit agent a∗, and (2) 

step-level attribution , where it must localize the decisive error step t∗. We report top-1 Agent accu-racy and Step accuracy for each dataset, and their macro-average across the three benchmarks (Ta-ble 1). Unless otherwise stated, failure modes f ∗

are used only as internal supervision signals rather than as an explicit evaluation target. 

5.2 Main Comparison 

Table 1 summarizes results across the three bench-marks. 

Single-pass judging struggles with step localiza-tion on long traces. Across backbones, LLM-as-a-Judge achieves moderate agent attribution accuracy but substantially lower step-level accuracy, partic-ularly on settings where the root cause may occur far earlier than the final symptom (e.g., TraceTraj Step < 10% for both Claude and GPT-OSS). This pattern is consistent with the intuition that a single model pass over a long trace tends to overweight late-stage symptoms and underutilize earlier causal evidence. 

Tool-augmented agentic evaluation can help, but is protocol-sensitive. Agent-as-a-Judge baselines improve step-level attribution in several settings (e.g., Who&When-Algo Step increases 6.3% for Claude and 8.9% for GPT-OSS), indicating that in-teractive inspection can surface additional evidence beyond what the raw trace alone provides. At the same time, agent-level attribution can be brittle un-der this baseline protocol (e.g., Who&When-Algo Agent accuracy decreases for both Claude and GPT-OSS), motivating for a more structured diagnostic procedure. 

ERROR PROBE substantially improves decisive-

> 1Many traces approach or exceed Qwen 3 32B’s context window in the single-judge setting, leading to severe trunca-tion. We therefore omit Qwen3 32B from LLM-as-a-Judge in Table 1 and only report it in Agent-as-a-Judge settings where backward tracing keeps inputs within budget.

6TracerTraj Who & When (Algo) Who & When (Hand) Average Method Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step                                                                                           

> LLM-as-a-Judge
> Claude 3.7 Sonnet 67.70% 8.70% 55.60% 41.30% 43.10% 13.80% 57.03% 21.27% GPT-OSS-120B 70.00% 7.90% 44.50% 18.50% 29.30% 19.00% 47.93% 15.13%
> Agent-as-a-Judge (baseline)
> Claude 3.7 Sonnet 59.30% 11.10% 21.40% 47.60% 58.60% 15.50% 46.43% 24.73% GPT-OSS-120B 71.10% 15.70% 18.30% 29.40% 50.00% 8.60% 46.47% 17.90% Qwen3 32B 65.60% 12.60% 19.00% 39.70% 41.70% 15.50% 42.10% 22.60%
> ERROR PROBE (ours)
> Claude 3.7 Sonnet 68.50% 34.60% 49.20% 58.70% 46.60% 27.6% 56.33% 41.90% GPT-OSS-120B 70.40% 20.50% 46.80% 29.40% 56.90% 27.60% 58.46% 25.83% Qwen3 32B 70.90% 33.10% 38.10% 28.60% 43.10% 25.90% 50.70% 29.20%
> ERROR PROBE (ours, with memory)
> Claude 3.7 Sonnet 73.20% 39.40% 60.30% 59.50% 50.00% 29.30% 59.60% 42.73%
> GPT-OSS-120B 71.70% 29.60% 49.20% 34.10% 59.90% 29.60% 60.27% 31.10% Qwen3 32B 77.80% 44.40% 38.90% 29.40% 46.60% 31.00% 54.43% 34.93%

Table 1: Main results comparing LLM-as-a-Judge against Agent-as-a-Judge baselines and our methods. Bold 

indicates best per column. “Average” is macro-averaged to weight each benchmark equally. 

step localization. Introducing MAST-guided de-composition and backward tracing ( Agent-as-a-Judge (ours) ) yields large gains in step localization across all three benchmarks for Claude and GPT-OSS. On average, E RROR PROBE improves Step accuracy from 20 .6% with Claude and from 13 .7% 

with GPT-OSS. The largest improvements occur on AgenTracer (Claude Step 25 .9% ; GPT-OSS Step 

12 .6% ), consistent with E RROR PROBE ’s goal of recovering earlier causal steps in long trajectories rather than localizing to the final error manifesta-tion. Agent attribution also improves substantially on Who&When-Algo (e.g., Claude Agent 27 .8% ;GPT-OSS Agent 28 .5% ), suggesting that evidence-focused tracing helps disambiguate which agent introduced the decisive mistake. 

Verified memory provides additional gains, es-pecially for weaker backbones. Enabling ver-ified episodic memory further improves perfor-mance, with the clearest gains for GPT-OSS-120B. For Claude, memory yields smaller but consis-tent improvements in Step accuracy on average, with notable gains on AgenTracer (Step 4.8% ) and Who&When-Algo (Step 0.8% ). For Qwen3-32B in the agentic settings, memory similarly lifts both Agent and Step accuracy. Overall, these results support a key design goal of verified-before-write: memory can reuse robust diagnostic patterns while remaining controlled by explicit verification. The strongest and most consistent benefit of E R-

> ROR

PROBE is improved step-level localization un-der long, failure-prone trajectories. Across bench-marks, the results suggest that (i) interactive inspec-tion is helpful but not sufficient on its own, and (ii) structured decomposition, backward causal trac-ing, and verification-driven memory together yield more reliable attribution than single-pass judging. 

6 Analysis on Memory 

6.1 In-Domain Memory Evaluation 

We compare a Baseline (memory off) against a 

Memory-Augmented variant across four domains: MBPP and KodCode (coding), GSM8K and MATH (math reasoning). Because collecting labeled multi-agent failures is costly, we generate trajectories us-ing multiple MAS frameworks and retain only the failed traces to focus analysis on diagnosis under error. We split traces into train and test partitions, and manually annotate test traces for evaluation. 

Efficacy of in-domain memory. Table 2 shows that enabling verified memory yields consistent improvements across domains. Averaged over the four domains, memory improves agent attri-bution by +10 .9 points and step localization by 

+13 .4 points, indicating that diagnosis benefits from reusing previously verified error patterns in addition to per-instance reasoning. The magnitude of improvement correlates with how repetitive error modes are within a domain. 7MBPP KodCode GSM8K MATH Setting Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step ERROR PROBE (ours) 87.3% 33.3% 64.8% 47.2% 25.0% 30.0% 68.6% 80.0%                  

> ERROR PROBE (ours, with memory) 88.9% 36.5% 81.9% 56.8% 50.0% 65.0% 68.6% 85.7%
> Improvement +1.6 +3.2 +17.1 +9.6 +25.0 +35.0 +0.0 +5.7

Table 2: In-domain Memory Comparison with Curated Error MAS Reasoning Traces. 

Figure 3: Learning curves for Agent and Step accuracy as memory is populated with increasing portions data. 

GSM8K exhibits the largest gains (+35.0 Step), consistent with failures that often arise from re-peated arithmetic or logic templates. KodCode shows strong Agent gains (+17.1), suggesting re-current coordination and tool/API misuse patterns. In contrast, MATH sees smaller gains, consistent with more heterogeneous reasoning chains. 

6.2 Memory Scaling 

Figure 3 shows learning curves for Agent and Step Accuracy as memory is populated with increasing training traces from KodCode . Both metrics ben-efit from memory, but with different sensitivities. Agent Accuracy improves 1.6% , while Step Ac-curacy shows more pronounced gains 4.0% . This suggests base LLMs have strong priors for agent attribution but struggle with pinpointing the deci-sive error step; the memory module provides “error signatures” that disambiguate the root cause step. These gains are achieved in an OOD setting, where patterns from KodCode are applied to Agen-Tracer . The steady upward trend indicates that the Verified-Before-Write gate successfully filters domain-specific noise, retaining only structural mo-tifs that generalize across frameworks. The steepest Step Accuracy improvement occurs between 75% and 100% data marks the diagnostic “memory” is still expanding; further scaling should yield marginal gains for rare failure modes. 

6.3 Case Study: Memory Turns Abstention into Correct Attribution 

In complex traces, baselines often abstain due to ambiguous evidence. Memory augmentation re-solves this by retrieving verified diagnostic guards. We illustrate this in the following KodCode trace:        

> Scenario: The agent attempts a Shell Sort implementation.
> Ground Truth: Agent= Engineer , Step=8.
> “The Engineer claims successful Shell Sort implementation, but the file content is truncated.”
> Baseline Prediction:
> Agent= unknown , Step= [10]
> →Abstention (Incorrect)
> +Memory Prediction:
> Agent= Engineer , Step= [8]
> →Correct Attribution (Gold step 8)

Here, the baseline abstained due to insuffi-cient explicit evidence. However, the memory-augmented system retrieved a guard advising to “verify that all file operations were successfully ex-ecuted ”. This primed the model to identify the 

reasoning_action_mismatch pattern, correctly attributing the error to unverified claims. For a detailed analysis of the failure modes resolved by memory and the specific mechanisms driving these improvements, see Appendix B.2. 

7 Conclusion 

We have introduced E RROR PROBE , a framework designed to resolve the challenge of semantic fail-ure attribution in complex multi-agent workflows. By synthesizing symptom-driven backward trac-ing with a verified episodic memory, our approach effectively filters interaction noise and capitalizes on historical error patterns to enhance diagnostic precision. Empirical evaluations across three di-verse benchmarks confirm that E RROR PROBE con-sistently outperforms recent baselines, specifically excelling in the difficult task of temporal error lo-calization. Ultimately, these results underscore that structured, tool-grounded verification is a requisite component for building trustworthy multi-agent systems capable of self-improvement. 8Limitations 

While E RROR PROBE offers significant improve-ments in multi-agent failure attribution, we identify several boundaries to its current scope: 

Dependency on Explicit Signals. Our symptom-driven backward tracing is predicated on the pres-ence of detectable anomalies (e.g., exceptions, logic inconsistencies, or verifiable constraints). Consequently, “silent failures”, where agents pro-duce technically valid but semantically incorrect outputs without triggering MAST detectors, remain a challenge. This is a known hurdle in fault local-ization; future work may integrate test-time oracle feedbacks to expose such latent errors. 

Inference Latency. The reliability of our multi-agent diagnostic team (Strategist, Investigator, Ar-biter) comes at the cost of increased inference com-pute compared to other non-MAS baselines. While our backward tracing mechanism significantly op-timizes context usage, the iterative nature of tool-assisted verification currently constrains applicabil-ity in ultra-low-latency production environments. We view this as a necessary trade-off for high-precision debugging in offline or asynchronous workflows. 

Backbone Model Diversity. Due to the signif-icant computational costs associated with multi-agent evaluation, we limited our experiments to three distinct model families. While we believe this selection provides sufficient evidence of the frame-work’s robustness across different architectures, we were unable to exhaustively validate performance against other high-end proprietary models. Future work should aim to extend this evaluation to a broader spectrum of LLM backbones to further confirm architecture-agnostic generalizability. 

Ethical Considerations 

This work introduces E RROR PROBE to assist in the benign debugging of multi-agent systems; we explicitly do not endorse its use for optimizing malicious agent behaviors or circumventing safety measures. While the framework improves diagnos-tic precision, it relies on explicit failure signals, limiting its utility for optimizing stealthy or “silent” malicious deviations. Our experiments utilize es-tablished public benchmarks strictly adhering to their respective licenses, and do not involve the collection of new human data. 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank Thinh Vinh Ho, Kexin Wang, and Hasan Ferit Eniser from the Alexa AIDo BFA team for their valuable support with the inter-nal experiments. 

References 

Adi Banerjee, Anirudh Nair, and Tarik Borogovac. 2025. Where did it all go wrong? a hierarchical look into multi-agent error attribution. In NeurIPS 2025 Work-shop on Evaluating the Evolving LLM Lifecycle: Benchmarks, Emergent Abilities, and Scaling .Anna Bavaresco, Raffaella Bernardi, Leonardo Berto-lazzi, Desmond Elliott, Raquel Fernández, Albert Gatt, Esam Ghaleb, Mario Giulianelli, Michael Hanna, Alexander Koller, André F. T. Martins, Philipp Mondorf, Vera Neplenbroek, Sandro Pezzelle, Barbara Plank, David Schlangen, Alessandro Sug-lia, Aditya K Surikuchi, Ece Takmaz, and Alberto Testoni. 2025. LLMs instead of human judges? a large scale empirical study across 20 NLP evaluation tasks. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 2: Short Papers) , pages 238–255. Mert Cemri, Melissa Z Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ramchandran, Matei Zaharia, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Why do multi-agent LLM sys-tems fail? In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Darshan Deshpande, Varun Gangal, Hersh Mehta, Jitin Krishnan, Anand Kannappan, and Rebecca Qian. 2025. TRAIL: Trace reasoning and agentic issue localization. Preprint , arXiv:2505.08638. Yu Ge, Linna Xie, Zhong Li, Yu Pei, and Tian Zhang. 2025. Who is introducing the failure? automatically attributing failures of multi-agent systems via spec-trum analysis. Preprint , arXiv:2509.13782. Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryu-taro Tanno, Khaled Saab, Dan Popovici, Jacob Blum, Fan Zhang, Katherine Chou, Avinatan Hassidim, Bu-rak Gokturk, Amin Vahdat, Pushmeet Kohli, and 15 others. 2025. Towards an ai co-scientist. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.18864. Yufei He, Juncheng Liu, Yue Liu, Yibo Li, Tri Cao, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinxing Xu, and Bryan Hooi. 2026. Evotest: Evolutionary test-time learning for self-improving agentic systems. In The Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, 

9Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024. MetaGPT: Meta pro-gramming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Senjie Jin, Jiejun Tan, Yan-bin Yin, Jiongnan Liu, Zeyu Zhang, Zhongxiang Sun, Yutao Zhu, Hao Sun, Boci Peng, and 28 others. 2025. Memory in the age of AI agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2512.13564. Seungone Kim, Jamin Shin, Yejin Cho, Joel Jang, Shayne Longpre, Hwaran Lee, Sangdoo Yun, Seongjin Shin, Sungdong Kim, James Thorne, and Minjoon Seo. 2024. Prometheus: Inducing fine-grained evaluation capability in language models. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jiazheng Li, Lin Gui, Yuxiang Zhou, David West, Ce-sare Aloisi, and Yulan He. 2023a. Distilling Chat-GPT for explainable automated student answer as-sessment. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 .Jiazheng Li, Zhaoyue Sun, Bin Liang, Lin Gui, and Yulan He. 2023b. CUE: An uncertainty interpretation framework for text classifiers built on pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence .Jiazheng Li, Hainiu Xu, Zhaoyue Sun, Yuxiang Zhou, David West, Cesare Aloisi, and Yulan He. 2024. Calibrating LLMs with preference optimization on thought trees for generating rationale in science ques-tion scoring. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 .Jiazheng Li, Hanqi Yan, and Yulan He. 2025a. Drift: Enhancing LLM faithfulness in rationale generation via dual-reward probabilistic inference. In Proceed-ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Jiazheng Li, Yuxiang Zhou, Junru Lu, Gladys Tyen, Lin Gui, Cesare Aloisi, and Yulan He. 2025b. Two heads are better than one: Dual-model verbal reflection at inference-time. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Xuechen Liang, Yangfan He, Yinghui Xia, Xinyuan Song, Meiling Tao, Kuan Lu, Jianhui Wang, Li Sun, Xinhang Yuan, Keqin Li, Jiaqi Chen, TIANYU SHI, and Yang Jingsong. 2026. Self-evolving agents with reflective and memory-augmented abilities. In LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems: Towards Responsible, Reliable, and Scalable Agentic Systems .Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12. Wei Liu, Siya Qi, Yali Du, and Yulan He. 2026. Self-play only evolves when self-synthetic pipeline ensures learnable information gain. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.02218. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2511–2522. Xuyan Ma, Xiaofei Xie, Yawen Wang, Junjie Wang, Boyu Wu, Mingyang Li, and Qing Wang. 2025. Di-agnosing failure root causes in platform-orchestrated agentic systems: Dataset, taxonomy, and benchmark. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.23735. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 36. OpenAI. 2024. Swarm. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ian J. Good-fellow. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. Preprint , arXiv:2310.08560. Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simu-lacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , UIST ’23. ACM. Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024. Gorilla: Large language model con-nected with massive APIs. In The Thirty-eighth An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .

10 Weizhou Shen, Ziyi Yang, Chenliang Li, Zhiyuan Lu, Miao Peng, Huashan Sun, Yingcheng Shi, Shengyi Liao, Shaopeng Lai, Bo Zhang, Dayi-heng Liu, Fei Huang, Jingren Zhou, and Ming Yan. 2025. QwenLong-L1.5: Post-training recipe for long-context reasoning and memory management. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.12967. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 36. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2024. Autogen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Hanqi Yan, Linhai Zhang, Jiazheng Li, Zhenyi Shen, and Yulan He. 2025. Position: LLMs need a bayesian meta-reasoning framework for more robust and gen-eralizable reasoning. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper Track .Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2022a. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Jiayi Ye, Yanbo Wang, Yue Huang, Dongping Chen, Qihui Zhang, Nuno Moniz, Tian Gao, Werner Geyer, Chao Huang, Pin-Yu Chen, Nitesh V Chawla, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2025. Justice or prejudice? quan-tifying biases in LLM-as-a-judge. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Yifan Yu, Moyan Li, Shaoyuan Xu, Jinmiao Fu, Xinhai Hou, Fan Lai, and Bryan Wang. 2026. CORRECT: COndensed error RECognition via knowledge trans-fer in multi-agent systems. Guibin Zhang, Junhao Wang, Junjie Chen, Wangchun-shu Zhou, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng YAN. 2026. Agentracer: Who is inducing failure in the LLM agentic systems? In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Guibin Zhang, Yanwei Yue, Zhixun Li, Sukwon Yun, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, Jef-frey Xu Yu, and Tianlong Chen. 2025a. Cut the crap: An economical communication pipeline for LLM-based multi-agent systems. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Shaokun Zhang, Ming Yin, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Zhiguang Han, Jingyang Zhang, Beibin Li, Chi Wang, Huazheng Wang, Yiran Chen, and Qingyun Wu. 2025b. Which agent causes task failures and when? on automated failure attribution of LLM multi-agent systems. In Forty-second International Confer-ence on Machine Learning .Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. A survey on the memory mecha-nism of large language model based agents. ACM Transactions on Information Systems .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 36. Yuxiang Zhou, Jiazheng Li, Yanzheng Xiang, Hanqi Yan, Lin Gui, and Yulan He. 2024. The mystery of in-context learning: A comprehensive survey on interpretation and analysis. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Mingchen Zhuge, Changsheng Zhao, Dylan R. Ashley, Wenyi Wang, Dmitrii Khizbullin, Yunyang Xiong, Zechun Liu, Ernie Chang, Raghuraman Krishnamoor-thi, Yuandong Tian, Yangyang Shi, Vikas Chandra, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2025. Agent-as-a-judge: Evaluate agents with agents. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning .

A Experimental Details 

Hyperparameters For each backbone and method, we tune any method-specific hyperparam-eters (e.g., number of retrieved memory entries k,verification threshold τ ) on a held-out subset of TRACER TRAJ , and reuse the same configuration across all datasets to avoid test-set overfitting. All reported numbers are averaged over 5 inde-pendent runs with default temperature. Standard deviations across runs were small (typically ±1.5% 

for Agent accuracy and ±2.5% for Step accuracy), so we report median only in Table 1 for clarity. Using a two-proportion z-test, the Step accuracy improvements of E RROR PROBE over LLM-as-a-Judge are statistically significant ( p< 0.01 ) across 11 all benchmarks, with effect sizes of +30.7% (Trac-erTraj), +18.2% (Who&When Algo), and +15.5% (Who&When Hand). Table 3 summarizes the key hyperparameters used in E RROR PROBE . All values were tuned on a held-out subset of T RACER TRAJ (10% of traces) and fixed across all evaluation benchmarks.             

> Parameter Value Description
> k5Number of retrieved memory entries for the Strategist
> τ0.7 Confidence threshold for memory com-mitment
> α0.6 Weight for semantic similarity in hybrid retrieval (vs. frequency)
> d1536 Embedding dimension for memory keys
> T0.7 Decoding temperature for LLM calls

Table 3: Hyperparameter settings for E RROR PROBE .

Benchmark Details We evaluate our framework across three distinct datasets chosen to cover a spec-trum of difficulty, from simple logic errors to com-plex structural misalignment. Table 4 summarizes their key statistics. 

TracerTraj. This benchmark is derived from the TRACER TRAJ dataset introduced by Zhang et al. (2026), specifically focusing on the code generation domain (e.g., tasks from MBPP+, KodCode). It evaluates agents within popular frameworks such as META GPT, O PEN HANDS (formerly OpenDevin), and A UTO GEN . Unlike datasets with naturally occurring errors, A GEN TRACER employs a pro-grammatic fault injection mechanism. A specific “perturbation operator” is applied to a ground-truth successful trajectory at step t (e.g., modifying a cor-rect code block to contain a bug or altering a tool argument), thereby generating a failure trace. This methodology ensures the ground truth for failure attribution is absolute by construction, eliminating annotation ambiguity and allowing for precise eval-uation of the model’s ability to locate the exact “decisive error” step. 

Who&When-Algo. This subset represents or-ganic failures from the W HO &W HEN benchmark (Zhang et al., 2025b), focusing on systems with algorithmically generated team structures. The tra-jectories are collected from C APTAIN AGENT and its adaptive variants (e.g., AG2), where a central “Captain” dynamically orchestrates nested teams of specialized agents tailored to specific reasoning and logic queries. The errors in this dataset are non-synthetic, arising naturally during the complex interactions of these dynamically formed teams. Ground truth is established through rigorous hu-man annotation, where experts identify the earliest action in the trace that, if corrected, would pre-vent the task failure. This dataset tests attribution performance in highly adaptive, fluid multi-agent environments. 

Who&When-Hand. Serving as a proxy for sta-ble, production-grade systems, this subset from Zhang et al. (2025b) features organic failures from M AGNETIC ONE , a high-quality, orchestrator-based system. Unlike the Algo subset, the agen-tic architecture here is fixed, involving a static set of specialized roles (e.g., WebSurfer, FileSurfer, Coder) coordinated by a central orchestrator. The tasks involve complex, multi-step real-world sce-narios such as open-ended web navigation and file manipulation. Ground truth is strictly human-annotated, providing a “gold standard” for diag-nosing failures in mature, tool-heavy agentic work-flows where errors often stem from nuanced inter-action breakdowns rather than simple logic faults. 

Model Versions For reproducibility, we report the specific model versions used in our ex-periments. For Claude 3.7 Sonnet, we used 

claude-3-7-sonnet-20250219 . For GPT-OSS-120B, we used gpt-oss-120b-1 . For Qwen3 32B, we used qwen3-32b-v1 via the API accessible from the Bedrock. All experiments were conducted between Oct and Dec 2025. 

Computational Resources All experiments were conducted using API-based inference with no local GPU requirements. For a single diagno-sis, average inference time for E RROR PROBE is approximately 45 seconds for Claude 3.7 Sonnet. 

Licensing and Intended Use The evaluation benchmarks used in this work are subject to their original licenses: TracerTraj and AgenTracer are released under Apache 2.0 (Zhang et al., 2026), and Who&When is released under MIT license (Zhang et al., 2025b). We intend E RROR PROBE for re-search on multi-agent system debugging and do not endorse its use for circumventing safety mea-sures or concealing malicious agent behavior. 

B Further Experiments 

B.1 Who&When Protocol Baselines 

We also evaluate three failure attribution protocols from the Who&When benchmark (Zhang et al., 12 Feature AgenTracer Who&When-Algo Who&When-Hand Source Paper Zhang et al. (2026) Zhang et al. (2025b) Zhang et al. (2025b)             

> Size 127 127 58
> Failure Origin Synthetic Organic Organic
> Ground Truth Programmatic Injection Algorithm Generated Manual Annotation
> Primary Domain Code Generation Logic & Reasoning Web & Complex Tasks
> Table 4: Comparison of the multi-agent failure attribution benchmarks used in evaluation.

2025b): all at once , step by step , and 

binary search . Each protocol uses an LLM to predict (i) the responsible agent and (ii) the de-cisive step that triggered the observed task fail-ure. We instantiate these protocols with three rep-resentative backbones (Claude 3.7 Sonnet, GPT-OSS-120B, and Qwen3 32B) and report results on Who&When (Algorithm-Generated), Who&When (Hand-Crafted), and TracerTraj-Code. Table 5 sum-marizes the results. 

Protocol choice induces a clear agent step trade-off. On Who&When (Algorithm-Generated), 

all_at_once achieves the strongest overall per-formance across models (57.94–61.11% Agent; 22.22–26.98% Step), suggesting that a single-pass judge can succeed when the trace structure is rel-atively regular and the failure signal is locally salient. In contrast, step_by_step substantially lowers agent accuracy on the same dataset (23.02– 24.60% Agent) while retaining moderate step accu-racy (15.08–19.05% Step), indicating that iterative decomposition can reduce reliability in agent attri-bution even when it remains competitive for step localization. 

Hand-Crafted traces benefit from iterative re-finement. On Who&When (Hand-Crafted), one-shot judging ( all_at_once ) largely fails to local-ize decisive steps (1.72–5.17% Step), despite mod-erate agent identification (34.48–41.38% Agent). Both iterative protocols improve step localization substantially, with step_by_step reaching up to 20.69% Step and binary_search reaching up to 17.24% Step. This pattern is consistent with Hand-Crafted cases requiring hypothesis refine-ment across multiple candidate explanations, where the earliest decisive step may be distant from the observed symptom. 

TracerTraj-Code is hardest for step localiza-tion, and binary_search is most effective. 

TracerTraj-Code remains challenging for step at-tribution: all_at_once and step_by_step yield very low step accuracy across all models (2.36– 4.72% Step). In contrast, binary_search im-proves step localization markedly (8.66–16.54% Step), while maintaining comparable agent accu-racy (51.97–55.91% Agent). This suggests that for longer, code-centric traces, the decisive step is often “upstream” of the failure manifestation, and systematic narrowing over the trace is more reliable than either single-shot judgment or purely sequential inspection. 

Model choice matters, but less than proto-col choice for step localization. The best-performing model depends on the dataset and protocol: GPT-OSS-120B performs best on Who&When (Algorithm-Generated) under 

all_at_once (26.98% Step), while Qwen3 32B performs best on Who&When (Hand-Crafted) under step_by_step (20.69% Step) and on TracerTraj-Code under binary_search (16.54% Step). However, the variance across protocols is larger than the variance across backbones, espe-cially on Hand-Crafted and TracerTraj-Code where the choice of attribution strategy dominates step-localization performance. Across all settings, the reproduced Who&When protocols demonstrate that multi-agent failure at-tribution is sensitive not only to the judge model but also to the attribution procedure. In particu-lar, all_at_once is competitive on more regular traces, while binary_search is consistently the most effective strategy for step localization on long and code-centric traces. 

B.2 Extended Error Analysis and Mechanisms 

We analyzed the 32 instances where memory aug-mentation corrected a previously incorrect baseline prediction. As shown in Table 6, the distribution re-veals that failures related to verification protocols, specifically incomplete_verification (11) and 

reasoning_action_mismatch (8), are the domi-nant modes resolved by memory. This suggests that learned guards are particularly effective at en-forcing rigorous verification protocols that baseline 13 Who & When (Algo) Who & When (Hand) TracerTraj Average Model Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step Agent Step 

all at once 

Claude 3.7 Sonnet 60.32% 25.40% 39.66% 5.17% 57.48% 3.15% 52.49% 11.24% GPT-OSS-120B 57.94% 26.98% 34.48% 1.72% 55.12% 2.36% 49.18% 10.35% Qwen3 32B 61.11% 22.22% 41.38% 3.45% 53.54% 3.94% 52.01% 9.87% 

step by step 

Claude 3.7 Sonnet 23.02% 15.08% 51.72% 17.24% 45.67% 4.72% 40.14% 12.35% GPT-OSS-120B 24.60% 19.05% 44.83% 13.79% 45.67% 3.94% 38.37% 12.26% Qwen3 32B 23.02% 15.87% 53.45% 20.69% 49.61% 2.36% 42.03% 12.97% 

binary search 

Claude 3.7 Sonnet 36.51% 11.90% 43.10% 15.52% 53.54% 11.81% 44.38% 13.08% GPT-OSS-120B 34.92% 19.84% 50.00% 13.79% 51.97% 8.66% 45.63% 14.10% Qwen3 32B 33.33% 17.46% 53.45% 17.24% 55.91% 16.54% 47.56% 17.08% 

Table 5: Who&When failure attribution baseline results using three canonical protocols: all at once , step by step , and binary search . We report Agent accuracy and Step accuracy on Who&When (Algo), Who&When (Hand-), and TracerTraj. 

models frequently overlook.         

> Error Family Count
> incomplete_verification 11
> reasoning_action_mismatch 8
> step_repetition 7
> context_loss 2
> fail_task_spec 2
> other 2
> Total 32

Table 6: Distribution of error families in cases where memory enabled correct detection over the baseline. 

We attribute this performance gain to three pri-mary mechanisms facilitated by the Error Patch Memory. First, Pattern Priming occurs when re-trieved guards prime the Analyzer to identify spe-cific failure signatures (e.g., unverified file oper-ations), effectively directing attention to relevant regions of the context window. Second, Span Cali-bration leverages positional metadata within mem-ory entries to align predicted error windows to the appropriate trace segments. Finally, Taxonomic Guidance aids in classifying ambiguous failures into actionable categories, significantly reducing model abstention rates by providing a structured decision framework. 

B.3 Illustration of Memory Content 

The following box displays a representative se-lection of verified failure patterns stored in the episodic memory. These natural language “guards” are generated by the Investigator and validated by the Arbiter to address specific MAST fail-ure modes, such as step_repetition or reason-ing_action_mismatch. By retrieving these guards during the diagnosis of new traces, E RROR PROBE 

utilizes historical evidence to prime the model for specific anomalies, thereby resolving ambiguous cases where standard prompts might abstain. 14 Illustration of Memory Content 

• Before considering a command execution com-plete, verify that the entire command was sent and executed successfully. For Editor.write 

commands, ensure the full file content is included and the command completes with proper JSON structure. • After attempting to create a file, verify the file exists by using a tool like os.path.exists() 

or by listing directory contents. If file creation fails, try an alternative approach or report the error. • Add a tracking mechanism to record what steps have already been completed. Before starting a new thinking or action step, check if it has already been done. For example: if ’task_assignment_complete’ in memory: 

skip_task_assignment() .• Before sending a message, verify that the tar-get agent exists in the current role list. If the specified agent is not found, raise a role-specification error or fallback to a valid agent (e.g., use the defined Engineer role instead of “Alex”). • Before issuing a finish command, the Team Leader must verify that the solution.py file actually exists in the workspace and that it passes all tests. Add a guard that checks the file system and runs the test suite, and only proceed to finish when both checks succeed. • Add a guard that detects when the Engineer re-peats ’thinking’ steps without performing any file or code actions for more than two consec-utive turns, and forces the next step to be an actionable one (e.g., create a file, write code, or run a test). • Add a guard that detects low-complexity (XS) user requests and forces the assistant to respond directly with the solution instead of spawning additional agents. 

15