Title: Priority-Driven Control and Communication in Decentralized Multi-Agent Systems via Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10482v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:22:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Priority-Driven Control and Communication in Decentralized Multi-Agent Systems via Reinforcement Learning 

Qingyun Guo ∗ Junyi Shi ∗ Tomasz Piotr Kucner ∗,∗∗ 

Dominik Baumann ∗,∗∗ ∗ Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland (e-mail: firstname.lastname@aalto.fi)  

> ∗∗

Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence, Helsinki, Finland 

Abstract: Event-triggered control provides a mechanism for avoiding excessive use of con-strained communication bandwidth in networked multi-agent systems. However, most existing methods rely on accurate system models, which may be unavailable in practice. In this work, we propose a model-free, priority-driven reinforcement learning algorithm that learns communication priorities and control policies jointly from data in decentralized multi-agent systems. By learning communication priorities, we circumvent the hybrid action space typical in event-triggered control with binary communication decisions. We evaluate our algorithm on benchmark tasks and demonstrate that it outperforms the baseline method. 

Keywords: Reinforcement learning and deep learning in control, Multi-agent systems, Control architecture for multi-agent systems, Control under communication constraints, AI in networked control. 1. INTRODUCTION Networked Control Systems (NCSs) have attracted con-siderable attention due to their widespread applications in areas such as smart manufacturing and autonomous driv-ing (Baumann et al., 2021; Dang et al., 2022). NCSs inte-grate physical components, including sensors, controllers, and actuators, through a shared communication network. Typically, multiple control loops are established to manage these physical components through the network, making communication a shared and, consequently, limited re-source. One strategy to lower communication demand is to adopt event-triggered control (ETC) (Heemels et al., 2012; Miskowicz, 2015). In ETC, data are transmitted only when specific events occur, such as significant increases in control error or estimation uncertainty. Most ETC approaches rely on mathematical system mod-els (Heemels et al., 2012), which are often difficult to obtain for high-dimensional and nonlinear systems. Apromising alternative is model-free reinforcement learning (RL), which directly learns control and communication policies from data without requiring a system model (Funk et al., 2021; Shibata et al., 2023; Sedghi et al., 2022). A key challenge in applying RL to learn ETC is handling hybrid action spaces. In this context, each agent must decide at each time step whether to communicate (a discrete action) and determine the appropriate control signal (a continuous action). Due to the complexity of hybrid action spaces, most existing methods do not jointly optimize control and communication policies (Demirel et al., 2018; Yang and He, 2020; Tan, 2021), which may lead to sub-optimal results as the separation principle does not necessarily hold for ETC (Ramesh et al., 2011). Beyond this limitation, most RL-based ETC algorithms still focus on single-agent systems (Baumann et al., 2018; Funk et al., 2021; Dang et al., 2022). Few works extend to multi-agent systems, which typically adopt central-ized training with global information and assume peri-odic information exchange during training, even though communication is limited during execution. Under this paradigm, the multi-agent proximal policy option-critic (MAPPOC) (Kesper et al., 2023) algorithm leverages hier-archical RL to learn continuous control and discrete com-munication policies jointly. The multi-agent deep deter-ministic policy gradient (MADDPG) is used to learn ETC with the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm, which is applied to real robots (Shi-bata et al., 2023). These works assume that during train-ing, there is sufficient bandwidth for all agents to share information periodically. In practice, this assumption is rarely met. Besides, by making discrete communication decisions, in the worst case, also during execution, all agents may communicate at once and overload the network (Mager et al., 2022). To address the reliance on global information, the com-plexity of learning in a hybrid action space in existing methods, and the risk of overloading the network, we propose a priority-driven multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing (MARL) algorithm in which each agent jointly learns control policies and communication priorities. Communi-cation slots are then allocated to agents with the highest priorities. The general framework is shown in Figure 1. 

> arXiv:2605.10482v1 [eess.SY] 11 May 2026

Fig. 1. Our framework introduces priority-based control and communication in a decentralized multi-agent setting. Each agent i uses its local observation oi and received information ˆo to learn the policy π(ai | oi, ˆo).Agent i then transmits its communication priority 

ai, p through the wireless network. The L highest-priority agents are allocated bandwidth to broadcast their observations ˆo. Each agent applies ai, c and receives reward ri and a new local observation oi.

Although the use of continuous priorities has been ex-plored in linear model-based settings (Mastrangelo et al., 2019; Mager et al., 2022), our algorithm jointly learns control policies and communication priorities from data. This algorithm offers three significant advantages. First, by focusing on continuous communication priorities, we simplify the hybrid action space in existing methods to a purely continuous one. Second, the priority-based algo-rithm is well-suited to bandwidth-limited settings, since it allocates communication slots to agents with the highest priorities, thereby avoiding network overload. Most impor-tantly, our plug-and-play framework can be combined with any decentralized MARL algorithm, requiring only a few adjustments. 2. PROBLEM SETTING This section introduces the multi-agent system we study and formulates the problem as a Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (DEC-POMDP) for learning both control and communication policies. 

2.1 System Overview 

Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework. We consider a decentralized multi-agent system with N agents, where the dynamics of agent i are 

ot+1  

> i

= fi(oti, ˆot, a ti, η ti ), (1) with time step t ∈ N, local observation oti ∈ Rn, com-municated information ˆ ot, action ati ∈ Rm, and process noise ηti ∈ Rn. Each agent learns a policy π(ai | oi, ˆo)based on its local observation and information received to make optimal decisions. In our framework, the action consists of two components: the control action ai, c and the communication priority ai, p. The communication priorities of all agents determine the communication policy. To illustrate how communication priorities determine com-munication policies under limited bandwidth, we consider the case in which only L (L < N ) agents can transmit information simultaneously. To manage this, agents need to exchange their communication priorities through the network to determine which L agents hold the highest priorities. The key idea for exchanging priorities and de-termining the communication policy is to exploit the size advantage of priorities. Priorities can be cast as unsigned integer values, while the observation is typically a vector with multiple floating-point numbers. Thus, adding the priorities to the messages containing the observations that are exchanged anyway adds limited overhead. A potential real-world implementation is presented by Mager et al. (2022). Their many-to-all primitive broadcasts a priority aggregate through the network so that, at the end of each round, the aggregate is available to all agents. Thus, agents can locally determine whether their priority is among the L highest priorities. The final communication policy, therefore, allocates bandwidth to the L agents with the highest priorities, as shown in the flow from the “Priorities Exchange” block to the wireless network and back to the agents. The “Observations Exchange” block in Figure 1 indicates that agents with the highest priorities trans-mit their observations ˆ o, enabling others to update their policies with additional information. Consequently, the communicated information consists of two components: concatenation of L agents’ communicated observations ˆot and communication priorities. To ensure a consistent policy input, communicated observations are arranged in a fixed agent-ID order, with zero vectors padded for non-communicating agents and for the receiving agent itself. 

2.2 Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Process 

We model the multi-agent system as a DEC-POMDP, 

⟨S, A, P, R, O, N, γ ⟩, where S ⊆ Rs is the state space, 

A = QNi=1 Ai ⊆ Rm×N is the joint action space, P : S ×A× S′ → [0 , 1] is the transition probability, R : S ×A → R

is the shared reward function, O = QNi=1 Oi ⊆ Rn×N is the joint local observation space, N is the number of agents, and γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor. Each agent’s action consists of a control action ai, c and a communication priority ai, p, so that Ai = Ai, c × A i, p. Since the system is decentralized, agent i relies only on its local observation 

oi and communicated information ˆ o rather than the global state s, and learns a factorized policy 

π(a | o, ˆo) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

πc(ai, c | oi, ˆo) πp(ai, p | oi, ˆo), (2) where bold symbols indicate joint vectors of all agents. Only the L agents with the highest communication priori-ties are allocated communication slots, and these selected agents broadcast their information to all others. Unlike standard RL, where the reward function R(s, a) typically quantifies only the control reward ri, c, we additionally incorporate a communication penalty ri, p to discourage agents from always assigning high communication priori-ties. The overall discounted return for agent i is 

Gi = E

" ∞X

> k=0

γk(rt+ki, c + rt+ki, p )

#

= E

" ∞X

> k=0

γk(rt+ki, c − ξa t+ki, p )

#

,

(3) where ai, p is the communication priority, and ξ > 0 is a weighting parameter. For the control reward, we adopt the shared reward setting, a common setting in decentralized MARL algorithms (Su and Lu, 2024). In this setting, agents’ rewards are averaged to yield a single mean reward, and the concrete form of the control reward depends on the considered system. We aim to jointly optimize the control policy and communication priority to maximize the expected discounted return in (3). 3. METHODOLOGY To optimize performance and facilitate implementation, we choose the Independent Proximal Policy Optimiza-tion (IPPO) algorithm (Witt et al., 2020) as the base MARL algorithm, integrating it with our framework to form Control-Priority IPPO, while noting that our frame-work is compatible with other MARL algorithms. In our implementation, we extend the original action space to include a continuous communication priority ai, p ∈ (0 , 1), alongside designing a communication priority penalty ri, p.A higher value of ai, p indicates a greater urgency and importance of an agent’s communication at the expense of a higher communication penalty. This setup allows our framework to seamlessly integrate into IPPO, enabling the joint learning of control policies and communication priori-ties without additional neural networks. Below, we provide a brief overview of Control-Priority IPPO. It maintains the robustness and simplicity of PPO while allowing agents to learn independently from local observations and com-municated information, making it particularly suitable for decentralized settings. For each agent, the actor network, parameterized by θ, learns the control policy and commu-nication priority, while the critic network, parameterized by ϕ, learns the value function. The objective for updating the policy of agent i is 

Li(θ) = Et



min 

 πθ (ati|˜oti)

πθold (ati|˜oti) Ati,

clip 

 πθ (ati|˜oti)

πθold (ati|˜oti) , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ



Ati

 

,

(4) where Et[·] denotes the empirical expectation over the sampled trajectories, ϵ is the clipping ratio (set to 0.2), ˜ oti is the concatenation of local observation oti and information ˆot from agents who are allowed to communicate, and Ati is estimated by Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016). The clipped surrogate follows Schulman et al. (2017). Specifically, 

Ati =

> T

X

> k=0

(γλ )kδt+ki , (5) where λ is the discount factor for GAE, T is the time steps for data collection, δti = rti + γV ϕ(˜ ot+1  

> i

) − Vϕ(˜ oti) and Vϕ

is the value function approximated by the critic network. The objective for updating the value function of agent i is 

Li(ϕ) = Et



min 



Vϕ(˜ oti) − ˆV ti

2

,



Vϕold (˜ oti) + clip  Vϕ(˜ oti) − Vϕold (˜ oti), −ϵ, ϵ  − ˆV ti

2  

,

(6) where ϕold are old parameters before the update, and ˆV ti =

Ati + Vϕ(˜ oti) (Witt et al., 2020). The learning procedure of our method is summarized in Algorithm 1. For each agent, the rollout buffer Di stores the samples collected. After each rollout, GAE is computed from Di, and mini-batches sampled from Di are used to update the actor and critic networks according to Equations (4) and (6). 

Algorithm 1: Control-Priority Independent Proximal Policy Optimization Initialize θi, ϕ i for all agents i = 1 , . . . , N ;

while step ≤ step max do 

Di ← ∅ for all agents; 

for t = 1 to T do for i = 1 to N do 

ati, c, a ti, p ∼ πθ (oti, ˆot), vti ← Vϕ(oti, ˆot); Execute ati, c, observe rti, c, o t+1  

> i

;Store ( ati, c, a ti, p, v ti , r ti, c, ˜oti, o t+1  

> i

) in Di;The top-L agents transmit ˆ ot+1 based on πt

> p

and all agents send priorities; Observe rt 

> p

and store ( rti, p, ˆot+1 ) in each Di;Compute and store A via Equation (5); 

for k = 1 to K do for i = 1 to N do 

Sample Bi from Di and update θi, ϕ i using Equations (4) and (6); 4. EXPERIMENTS In this section, we present experimental results 1 in the fol-lowing simulation environments: Multiwalker (Terry et al., 2021), Coverage Control, and Formation Control (Agarwal et al., 2020). These environments span both low- and high-dimensional scenarios and involve varying numbers of agents, allowing us to comprehensively evaluate the effec-tiveness of our algorithm. We use IPPO with round-robin communication as the baseline. In this setting, agents com-municate in turns, learn only control policies, and therefore incur no communication penalty. Following Mager et al. (2022), we allocate L1 communication slots to round-robin communication and L2 slots to priority communication, with L1 ≥ L2. The smaller number of slots for our algo-rithm accounts for the additional overhead of transmitting compact priority values. We train 10 million steps for all environment settings. Solid lines in training figures are mean episode rewards over three random seeds, and the shaded area is the standard deviation. 

4.1 Environments Description Coverage Control In Coverage Control, there are N

agents and M landmarks, as shown in Figure 2a. The goal is for agents to position themselves such that each landmark is within a certain distance of at least one agent. The control action is two-dimensional, corresponding to horizontal and vertical motion. The shared reward is the negative average distance from each landmark to its nearest agent (Agarwal et al., 2020). In the native implementation, the local observation of an agent includes its position, velocity, the position of landmarks relative to the agent, and the positions of other agents relative to            

> 1Videos and code of our experimental results are available at
> https://etcpriority.github.io/ .(a) Coverage Control (b) Formation Control

Fig. 2. (a) Coverage Control: Agents (purple) deploy them-selves so that every agent reaches a distinct landmark (black). (b) Formation Control: Agents (purple) po-sition themselves into a regular polygonal formation, with the landmark (black) at its center. the agent. To make communication necessary, we remove the information of other agents, which we obtain through communication. Thus, the local observation of each agent consists of its position, velocity, and the relative position of landmarks. The communicated information is the other agents’ positions and velocities. 

Formation Control There are N agents and one land-mark in this environment, as shown in Figure 2b. The objective is for agents to form an N -sided regular polygon with the landmark at its center. The orientation of the polygon is not specified, nor are agents assigned to specific points on the polygon. Instead, the agents communicate with each other to distribute themselves uniformly (Agar-wal et al., 2020). The control action space in this envi-ronment is the same as in Coverage Control. The reward function for this environment consists of two components: a penalty for deviation from the target distance of 0.5 units to the landmark and a penalty for deviation from the ideal angular spacing of 2πN between agents. We make the same modifications to local observations in this environment as in Coverage Control. 

Multiwalker We select this environment to evaluate our algorithm’s performance in a high-dimensional setting. In this environment, bipedal robots (walkers) aim to transport a package from the left side to the right side of the terrain; see Figure 3. Each walker applies force to two joints in each of its two legs, resulting in a continuous action space represented by a 4-element vector. Walkers get a reward based on the distance the package moves forward each time step. The simulation ends if the package falls off the walkers, goes off the left edge of the terrain, or if any walker falls. In these cases, each walker receives a penalty of -100. In the native implementation of Multiwalker, the observa-tion includes the agent’s joint status, LIDAR information about the environment in front of them, state information about their neighbors in the form of relative positions, and their relative position and angle towards the package. To make communication necessary, we follow the modi-fications by Kesper et al. (2023) and remove all LIDAR information and information of neighbors. Each agent can only receive information about its joint status and the package. When agent i communicates, it sends its absolute position and velocity to other agents, from which receiving agents can calculate relative positions and velocities. 

Fig. 3. Multiwalker environment: Walkers try to transport the package to the destination without falling down. 

Network Model and Message Size For both our algo-rithm and IPPO-Round Robin, we use the same network disturbance settings in all environments: message loss is uniformly distributed with probability 0.2, and message delay is one time step. If an agent’s message is dropped, it is not delivered to any other agent. When priority messages are lost, our algorithm defaults to round-robin communication for that time step. In all environments, each communicated observation contains the agent’s posi-tions and velocities along the x- and y-axes, represented by four 32 bit floating-point numbers. So, the size of one message is 16 B. By contrast, communication priorities can be encoded as small integers and require only about 3 bit in our settings. 

4.2 Results N=3, L1=1, L2=1 We set the number of agents to three and allow one agent to communicate per time step. Under this setting, we test our algorithm in Coverage Control and Multiwalker. For Coverage Control, as shown in Figure 4a, IPPO with round-robin communication converges faster because it does not need to learn communication policies. However, naive round-robin communication limits the ability to learn better control policies. Our algorithm requires more training steps to balance communication penalties and communication needs. Still, it eventually achieves higher average rewards than IPPO with round-robin communi-cation. Under bandwidth constraints, our algorithm al-lows the agent with the highest priority to communicate, making the transmitted information more useful for other agents to learn control policies than in round-robin com-munication. For Multiwalker, Figure 4b shows a clear advantage of our method over IPPO with round-robin communication after the initial learning phase. This suggests that priority-based communication can improve control performance in nonlinear and high-dimensional environments. 

N=6, L1=2, L2=1 To further evaluate both the effec-tiveness and scalability of our algorithm under restricted bandwidth, we increase the number of agents to six and allocate more communication slots to round-robin com-munication, i.e., two slots for round-robin and one for our algorithm. Under this setting, we test our algorithm in Multiwalker. From Figure 4c, we can see that when the number of agents increases to six, both methods recover quickly from initial large negative rewards, representing early trial and error where agents learn basic coordination without causing the package to fall. The episode rewards of IPPO with (a) Coverage Control with three agents. (b) Multiwalker with three agents.  

> (c) Multiwalker with six agents. (d) Formation Control with eight agents.

Fig. 4. Results for four tasks and agent configurations. Our algorithm (green) outperforms the baseline (blue) in all evaluated settings. Episode rewards of our algorithm include the communication penalty. 

> Steps Highest-Priority Agent

Fig. 5. Communication priority dynamics in the evaluation of the three-agent Multiwalker scenario. round-robin communication converge to approximately 70. Although our algorithm requires longer training time to converge, agents with priority communication achieve sig-nificantly higher performance, with episode rewards con-verging to over 200, and can move the package farther than the baseline. Comparing the two Multiwalker settings with the same communication slot ( L2 = 1), the converged episode rewards of our method decrease from approxi-mately 290 in the three-agent scenario to around 200 in the six-agent scenario, indicating that coordination becomes more challenging as the number of agents increases relative to the available bandwidth. 

N=8, L1=2, L2=1 To show that our algorithm still has an advantage over round-robin communication with more agents and restricted bandwidth, we increase the number of agents to eight and allocate two communication slots to round-robin communication and one to our algorithm. We choose a low-dimensional environment, Formation Control, to test our algorithm to ensure that IPPO can learn good control policies with eight agents. From Fig-ure 4d, we can see that over 10 million steps, our al-gorithm consistently outperforms IPPO with round-robin communication. This suggests that our algorithm is even more effective with more agents and restricted band-width, leveraging its single communication slot to opti-mize performance in a more crowded environment. De-spite having more communication slots, IPPO with round-robin communication does not perform better, suggesting that merely increasing communication frequency without strategic prioritization is less effective in this environment. 

Communication Priority Evaluation in Multiwalker To show that our algorithm learns meaningful communication priorities, we present the communication-priority dynam-ics of the three-agent Multiwalker scenario in Figure 5. The highest-priority agent changes over time according to the current task phase: agent 0 is prioritized when initiating the lift and handover, agent 1 is prioritized during the intermediate transfer, and agent 2 is prioritized in the final transport stage. This indicates that the learned priorities reflect the agents’ time-varying roles in coordination. 

Discussion of Scalability and Bandwidth Efficiency Com-pared to MAPPOC (Kesper et al., 2023), our algorithm offers advantages in both bandwidth efficiency and scala-bility. In the three-agent Multiwalker setting, MAPPOC reports 55 % bandwidth savings (Kesper et al., 2023), whereas our method uses only one communication slot per time step, achieving about 66 % savings with higher re-wards. In addition, as a CTDE-based method, MAPPOC requires global information during training, which causes the state space to grow with the number of agents and makes value-function learning more difficult (Qin et al., 2021). This issue becomes more pronounced when the number of agents increases and bandwidth is limited. In addition, our experiments account for message delays and losses, whereas many existing methods assume ideal com-munication (Kesper et al., 2023; Baumann et al., 2018). 5. CONCLUSION In this paper, we present a priority-driven algorithm for the joint learning of control and communication policies in a decentralized manner. Our approach has three advan-tages: (i) it simplifies the complexity of the hybrid action space, (ii) its priority-based communication mechanism can be easily adjusted to different bandwidth constraints, thereby improving flexibility, and (iii) it maintains a plug-and-play design, requiring minimal modifications to exist-ing MARL algorithms. Our algorithm achieves strong results while reducing band-width usage and maintaining high control performance under delay and message loss. Its scalability is improved by relying only on local observations and communicated infor-mation and by allocating bandwidth according to learned priorities, but the overall scalability remains limited by the underlying MARL algorithm. Extending this framework to larger numbers of agents and other decentralized MARL methods is an important direction for future work. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We acknowledge the computational resources provided by the Aalto Science-IT project. REFERENCES Agarwal, A., Kumar, S., Sycara, K., and Lewis, M. (2020). Learning transferable cooperative behavior in multi-agent teams. In International Conference on Au-tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems .Baumann, D., Mager, F., Wetzker, U., Thiele, L., Zim-merling, M., and Trimpe, S. (2021). Wireless control for smart manufacturing: Recent approaches and open challenges. Proceedings of the IEEE .Baumann, D., Zhu, J.J., Martius, G., and Trimpe, S. (2018). Deep reinforcement learning for event-triggered control. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control .Dang, F., Chen, D., Chen, J.W., and Li, Z. (2022). Event-triggered model predictive control with deep reinforce-ment learning for autonomous driving. IEEE Transac-tions on Intelligent Vehicles .Demirel, B., Ramaswamy, A., Quevedo, D.E., and Karl, H. (2018). Deepcas: A deep reinforcement learning algorithm for control-aware scheduling. IEEE Control Systems Letters .Funk, N., Baumann, D., Berenz, V., and Trimpe, S. (2021). Learning event-triggered control from data through joint optimization. IFAC Journal of Systems and Control .Heemels, W., Johansson, K.H., and Tabuada, P. (2012). An introduction to event-triggered and self-triggered control. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control .Kesper, L., Trimpe, S., and Baumann, D. (2023). To-ward multi-agent reinforcement learning for distributed event-triggered control. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference .Mager, F., Baumann, D., Herrmann, C., Trimpe, S., and Zimmerling, M. (2022). Scaling beyond bandwidth limitations: Wireless control with stability guarantees under overload. ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems .Mastrangelo, J.M., Baumann, D., and Trimpe, S. (2019). Predictive triggering for distributed control of resource constrained multi-agent systems. IFAC-PapersOnLine .Miskowicz, M. (ed.) (2015). Event-Based Control and Signal Processing . CRC Press, 1 edition. Qin, Z., Zhang, K., Chen, Y., Chen, J., and Fan, C. (2021). Learning safe multi-agent control with decentralized neural barrier certificates. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Ramesh, C., Sandberg, H., Bao, L., and Johansson, K.H. (2011). On the dual effect in state-based scheduling of networked control systems. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference .Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M.I., and Abbeel, P. (2016). High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algo-rithms. ArXiv , abs/1707.06347. Sedghi, L., Ijaz, Z., Noor-A-Rahim, M., Witheephanich, K., and Pesch, D. (2022). Machine learning in event-triggered control: Recent advances and open issues. 

IEEE Access .Shibata, K., Jimbo, T., and Matsubara, T. (2023). Deep reinforcement learning of event-triggered communica-tion and consensus-based control for distributed coop-erative transport. Robotics and Autonomous Systems .Su, K. and Lu, Z. (2024). A fully decentralized surrogate for multi-agent policy optimization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Tan, L.N. (2021). Event-triggered distributed H ∞ con-strained control of physically interconnected large-scale partially unknown strict-feedback systems. IEEE Trans-actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems .Terry, J., Black, B., Grammel, N., Jayakumar, M., Hari, A., Sullivan, R., Santos, L.S., Dieffendahl, C., Horsch, C., Perez-Vicente, R., Williams, N., Lokesh, Y., and Ravi, P. (2021). Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent rein-forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Witt, C.S.D., Gupta, T., Makoviichuk, D., Makoviychuk, V., Torr, P.H.S., Sun, M., and Whiteson, S. (2020). Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? ArXiv , abs/2011.09533. Yang, X. and He, H. (2020). Adaptive critic learning and experience replay for decentralized event-triggered con-trol of nonlinear interconnected systems. IEEE Trans-actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems .