Title: TopoChunker: Topology-Aware Agentic Document Chunking Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18409v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 00:33:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# TopoChunker: Topology-Aware Agentic Document Chunking Framework 

Xiaoyu Liu 

Independent Researcher 

liushifu986938279@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Current document chunking methods for Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) typ-ically linearize text. This forced lineariza-tion strips away intrinsic topological hierar-chies, creating “semantic fragmentation” that degrades downstream retrieval quality. In this paper, we propose TopoChunker, an agentic framework that maps heterogeneous documents onto a Structured Intermediate Representation (SIR) to explicitly preserve cross-segment de-pendencies. To balance structural fidelity with computational cost, TopoChunker employs a dual-agent architecture. An Inspector Agent dynamically routes documents through cost-optimized extraction paths, while a Refiner Agent performs capacity auditing and topo-logical context disambiguation to reconstruct hierarchical lineage. Evaluated on unstruc-tured narratives (GutenQA) and complex re-ports (GovReport), TopoChunker demonstrates state-of-the-art performance. It outperforms the strongest LLM-based baseline by 8.0% in absolute generation accuracy and achieves an 83.26% Recall@3, while simultaneously re-ducing token overhead by 23.5%, offering a scalable approach for structure-aware RAG. 

1 Introduction 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) mitigates Large Language Model (LLM) hallucinations by grounding generation in external knowledge. While long-context LLMs have continuously im-proved, fine-grained retrieval remains essential due to lower inference costs and the necessity to avoid the “Lost in the Middle” phenomenon. Conse-quently, document chunking acts as the founda-tional semantic filter in the RAG pipeline, directly determining the upper bound of downstream re-trieval quality. However, conventional chunking tools rely on static heuristics that are agnostic to inherent docu-ment topology. Even emerging LLM-based chun-kers (e.g., LumberChunker) predominantly operate under a rigid “text-to-text” paradigm, flattening complex, multi-modal documents (such as enter-prise PDFs) into linear text streams. This forced linearization introduces three main issues: visual-semantic disconnect, contextual fragmentation, and feature dilution. Such mechanical splitting strips chunks of their hierarchical topology, creating “se-mantic islands” that isolate context-dependent ter-minology and cause anaphoric ambiguity. Further-more, fully generative chunkers apply computation-ally expensive LLM reasoning uniformly across all text, resulting in redundant token expenditures on structurally simple content. To address these structural and computational constraints, we propose TopoChunker, a topology-aware framework for structural-fidelity document chunking. Unlike linear pipelines, TopoChun-ker treats documents as heterogeneous entities and maps them onto a shared Structured Inter-mediate Representation (SIR). Driven by a col-laborative dual-agent architecture—an Inspector Agent for routing and a Refiner Agent for seman-tic auditing—the system systematically bridges the gap between fragmented raw text and contextually self-contained RAG inputs. Our primary contributions are summarized as follows: • Adaptive Routing via Inspector Agent: We introduce a dynamic routing mechanism that actively probes document complexity. It opti-mizes the cost-fidelity trade-off by selectively applying rule-based slicing for standard lay-outs and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) for complex visual structures, thereby avoid-ing uniform LLM overhead. • Topological Modeling & Atomicity-Aware Execution: We propose the Structured Inter-mediate Representation (SIR) protocol to de-couple physical parsing from semantic rea-

> arXiv:2603.18409v1 [cs.CL] 19 Mar 2026

soning. Combined with a stack-based traver-sal algorithm and Atomicity Locking, this in-memory graph preserves logical hierarchies and prevents the physical fragmentation of indivisible units (e.g., cross-page tables). • Context Disambiguation via Refiner Agent: 

We design a diagnostic Refiner Agent that au-tonomously resolves contextual voids, such as grounding dangling pronouns and deci-phering isolated terminology, to generate self-contained chunks. Extensive evaluations show that TopoChunker yields state-of-the-art per-formance, outperforming the strongest base-line by an absolute margin of 8.0% in end-to-end generation accuracy and achieving 83.26% Recall@3, alongside a 23.5% reduc-tion in token consumption. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Granularity Evolution: From Heuristic Rules to Semantic Sensitivity 

Document chunking strategies have advanced from rigid, fixed-length heuristics to flexible, semantic-driven approaches. Traditional fixed-size chunk-ing serves as the baseline, partitioning text into segments of predefined character or token lengths, often employing an overlap window to mitigate boundary fragmentation. While simple to imple-ment, this approach frequently leads to semantic misalignment in structured documents. Recursive character chunking improves upon this by using prioritized delimiters to split text until segments fall below a threshold, making it better suited for hierarchical content. To further align with semantic boundaries, semantic-aware techniques have emerged. Seman-tic Chunker (Xiao et al., 2024) utilizes embedding similarity thresholds to merge sentence-level units, enhancing intra-chunk coherence. However, its performance remains contingent on embedding quality, and it often struggles with long-tail dis-tributions in complex documents. Meta-Chunking (Zhao et al., 2024) introduces model-derived sig-nals like perplexity fluctuations, while Lumber-Chunker (Duarte et al., 2024) explicitly leverages LLM reasoning to define boundaries. Despite these advances, the “feature dilution” problem persists: oversized chunks cause embedding vectors to shift toward noisy centroids, reducing retrieval discrim-inability. Furthermore, these methods are largely confined to single-granularity paradigms, failing to capture multi-dimensional topological features. TopoChunker addresses these structural limitations through its Structured Intermediate Representation (SIR), enabling dynamic granularity adjustment and explicit topology awareness. 

2.2 Hierarchical Representation and Context Augmentation in RAG 

The efficacy of RAG systems is significantly in-fluenced by the structured presentation of retrieved passages, as different queries necessitate varying levels of abstraction. AutoChunker (Jain et al., 2025) organizes information into tree structures but focuses primarily on static noise suppression rather than dynamic adjustment. Late Chunking (Gün-ther et al., 2024) applies context-aware embeddings before slicing to retain long-range dependencies; however, it ultimately outputs flat lists that are of-ten insufficient to capture deep physical topologies, such as nested section-item relationships. Inspired by the Mixture of Experts (MoE), MoC (Zhao et al., 2025) and MoG (Zhong et al., 2025) treat various chunking strategies as expert mod-ules managed by query-driven routers; however, their performance remains bounded by the underly-ing heuristics. While hierarchical retrieval mecha-nisms like Parent-Child Indexing attempt context augmentation, child chunks often degenerate into “semantic islands” due to a lack of intrinsically in-dependent context. Furthermore, many advanced RAG frameworks rely on heavyweight external graph databases, introducing substantial I/O over-head during preprocessing. Liu et al. (2024) noted that context utilization decays with position, sug-gesting that simple hierarchical associations are in-sufficient for high-precision retrieval. Unlike these methods, TopoChunker utilizes a lightweight, in-memory SIR with explicit parent-child-sibling re-lationships. By dynamically injecting Topological Lineage, it effectively facilitates multi-hop reason-ing over previously fragmented knowledge. 

2.3 Agentic Workflows and Adaptive Diagnostics for Document Intelligence 

The integration of autonomous agents introduces “reasoning-before-action” capabilities to handle un-structured document anomalies. Traditional mod-els based on LSTM or BERT are limited by nar-row context windows and single-level processing. RAG-oriented approaches like PIC (Wang et al., 2025) use pseudo-instructions for guidance but ex-hibit weak spatial awareness, struggling with het-erogeneous elements like nested tables. Although Vision-Language Models (VLMs) of-fer superior layout perception, their high compu-tational overhead often limits their viability for large-scale deployment. Furthermore, while emerg-ing agentic chunking frameworks introduce dy-namic decision-making, they typically lack rigor-ous quantitative diagnostics and closed-loop opti-mization mechanisms. As a result, they tend to apply LLM reasoning uniformly across all text, which incurs excessive token expenditure on stan-dard structural elements. To mitigate these ineffi-ciencies, TopoChunker employs an Inspector Agent designed around a cost-risk minimization objec-tive to prevent redundant processing. Paired with the Refiner Agent’s ReAct-driven diagnostic loop, this "Diagnosis-Execution-Audit" paradigm strate-gically allocates computationally expensive gen-erative reasoning to high-complexity data points, thereby improving both topological fidelity and inference efficiency compared to existing agentic workflows. 

3 Method 

3.1 Cognitive Perception and Adaptive Routing 

TopoChunker employs a three-stage agentic archi-tecture to address the limitations of linear ETL pipelines. As illustrated in Figure 1, the workflow transitions from perception and topological mod-eling to metadata assembly. The decision-making of all agents is driven by reasoning-focused LLMs (e.g., DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025)). The process begins in the Cognitive Perception Layer, where the Inspector Agent evaluates the trade-off between potential information loss and computational cost. 

3.1.1 Active Probing and Path Selection 

The Inspector Agent employs an active probing paradigm. Rather than consuming the entirety of the raw document, the agent is provided solely with a document identifier. Operating within the ReAct framework, it autonomously invokes a suite of lightweight API tools—such as metadata parsers, layout density scanners, and hierarchy analyzers— to perform sparse sampling. Through these tar-geted queries, the agent incrementally constructs a document-specific topology fingerprint ⃗ f .Crucially, this tool-driven decoupling com-presses the document’s spatial and hierarchical characteristics into a highly compact token foot-print (typically under 200 tokens). By evaluating this lightweight fingerprint instead of the full text, the Inspector avoids optimizing a rigid numeric objective function. Instead, it executes a prompt-driven reasoning loop to balance three dimensions: token expenditure, risk of information loss, and structural fidelity. This enables the system to dy-namically route heterogeneous inputs through one of three specialized extraction paths at a negligible computational cost: 

Path 1: Structural Rule. This path is activated for digital documents with clear heading hierar-chies when the agent determines that complex vi-sual parsing is computationally redundant. The structural processor performs dynamic hierarchy detection by pre-scanning the document to iden-tify recurring logical patterns (e.g., “Chapter 1,” “Section N,” or nested articles). These patterns are statistically mapped to specific Markdown levels, ensuring the final output explicitly preserves the tree-based skeleton of the original document. 

Path 2: Semantic Flow. Designed for unstruc-tured narratives where rule-based matching risks high information loss, this path prioritizes semantic continuity. Because these documents lack explicit physical hierarchies, the Inspector directly invokes the LLM-based Semantic_Slicer tool (detailed in Section 3.3) to evaluate the flat text. This de-composes the narrative into preliminary segments based on natural topic transitions. These sequential segments then serve as foundational nodes to con-struct a localized SIR, maintaining compatibility with downstream metadata assembly and disam-biguation phases. 

Path 3: Visual Topology. For scanned files or documents with complex spatial layouts, the In-spector triggers a vision-centric pipeline. This path leverages layout-aware VLM extractors (e.g., MinerU (Wang et al., 2024)) for physical parsing. Rather than flattening the output into linear text streams, TopoChunker explicitly preserves the ex-tracted coordinates and the physical integrity of non-textual elements (e.g., tables and charts), di-rectly mapping this spatial data into our logical Markdown representation. 

3.2 Topological Modeling and SIR Construction 

Although the three routing paths employ distinct extraction mechanisms, their outputs are unified Path 1: Structural Rule          

> Topological Pruner Input Document
> Chunks Output Chunks
> Layer 1: Cognitive Perception Layer Layer 2: Execution Layer Layer 3: Audit Layer Perception Toolkit
> Cost / Fidelity / Risk
> Check ReAct
> Loop
> Inspector Agent Meta Reader Layout Probe Regex Tester
> Path 2: Semantic Flow Path 3: Visual Topology
> SIR
> Refinement Toolkit
> Independence /Completeness /Size Check
> ReAct
> Loop
> Refiner Agent
> SIR Query Semantic Slicer Chunk Enhancer
> Path Information
> Semantic Signature
> Context Supplement

Figure 1: The overall architecture of TopoChunker. The dual-agent framework operates across three layers: Cognitive Perception (Inspector Agent for adaptive routing), Execution (Topological Pruner and SIR construction), and Audit (Refiner Agent for context disambiguation). These layers interact via a shared Structured Intermediate Representation (SIR) to form a closed-loop Diagnosis-Execution-Audit pipeline. 

into a standardized Markdown format. Following this standardization, the system constructs the topo-logical model. To mitigate the “contextual fragmen-tation” inherent in flat chunking, the Topological Pruner parses the unified output to build the hi-erarchical tree topology TSIR using a stack-based traversal algorithm. Each node v ∈ T SIR is defined by three core attributes: First, it captures the Topological Lineage ( v. Tid )by maintaining a hierarchy stack. This records the absolute global coordinates (e.g., /Chap1/Sec3 )for all child nodes, enabling explicit contextual inheritance. By tracing this lineage, any isolated leaf node can inherit macro-context from its an-cestors. Second, it enforces Atomicity Locking (v. Alock ). Nodes representing indivisible visual elements, such as tables or images, are flagged (v. Alock = True ) to prevent physical splitting. Fi-nally, it records a Token Audit ( v.W token ), pre-calculating the token weight of the node to allow the Refiner Agent to identify oversized subtrees in 

O(1) time. Systemically, TSIR is implemented as alightweight, in-memory object tree rather than a heavyweight external graph database, minimizing external I/O overhead during preprocessing. Once optimal chunking boundaries are determined, the leaf nodes are flattened, and their topological prop-erties are serialized as standard metadata payloads. 

3.3 Semantic Refinement and Context Assembly 

The premise of the SIR topology is that text un-der a specific heading natively forms a coherent semantic unit. However, encoding arbitrarily long structural blocks dilutes their representation in the embedding space, degrading downstream retrieval precision. To reconcile structural completeness with retrieval efficiency, the Refiner Agent man-ages the text segments via a ReAct paradigm (Yao et al., 2023). To achieve this, it is equipped with three tools: SIR_Query , Semantic_Slicer , and 

Chunk_Enhancer .The agent executes the refinement and assembly pipeline through a sequence of operations: 

3.3.1 Capacity Auditing and Semantic Slicing 

The refinement process begins with a capacity audit. The agent evaluates each node in TSIR against an empirical token threshold θ (set to 500 tokens in our Table 1: Domain-Specific RAG Performance. Performance is reported using Recall@ k (R@ k) and DCG@ k (D@ k). TopoChunker demonstrates consistently superior retrieval accuracy across both unstructured and highly structured domains.                                                 

> GutenQA GovReport R@3 D@3 R@5 D@5 R@3 D@3 R@5 D@5
> Recursive (FC200) 8.23 7.38 8.62 7.84 32.25 28.40 36.25 29.81 Semantic Chunker 14.49 12.43 16.56 13.29 55.37 48.96 61.75 51.39 Proposition-Level 47.23 42.27 53.22 45.73 66.17 61.36 73.88 59.44 LumberChunker 62.58 56.56 66.93 58.35 81.38 74.88 85.20 75.55
> TopoChunker 64.59 56.95 70.29 59.03 83.26 76.59 86.58 76.93

implementation). If a node exceeds this limit, the agent invokes the Semantic_Slicer . Internally, this tool uses regular expressions to explicitly iden-tify sentence boundaries and assigns sequential IDs (e.g., [S0], [S1], . . . ). These indexed sentences are then passed to the LLM via a zero-shot prompt to identify boundary IDs where significant topic or temporal shifts occur. To prevent hallucination errors, the generated IDs are deterministically vali-dated against the valid sequence before execution. This partitions oversized nodes into contextually coherent sub-chunks without disrupting the under-lying narrative flow. 

3.3.2 Semantic Signature Generation 

Once capacity constraints are met, the agent applies the Chunk_Enhancer to transform raw segments into self-contained units. To maximize lexical dis-criminability, the enhancer prompts the LLM to generate a concise, 3-to-8 word thematic title that abstracts the core topic, avoiding the simple extrac-tion of the first sentence. This ensures the chunk is indexed with a precise semantic signature rather than relying solely on generalized macro-headers. 

3.3.3 Topological Context Disambiguation 

To resolve semantic fragmentation and elimi-nate “semantic islands,” the agent performs a fi-nal context-grounding step at the chunk level. It audits the chunk’s payload for unresolved pronominal anaphora, demonstrative references, and isolated context-dependent terminology (e.g., domain-specific acronyms). Upon detecting these contextual voids, the agent triggers SIR_Query .Instead of executing external graph database queries, SIR_Query deterministically traverses the in-memory object tree. By navigating topological pointers (e.g., parent , prev_sibling ), the agent re-trieves entity definitions and macro-context from ancestor nodes. This resolved context is then ex-plicitly fused into the chunk’s text, providing down-stream models with a logically complete and struc-turally grounded premise. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate our framework on two benchmarks: GutenQA and GovReport. Specif-ically, GutenQA comprises 100 public domain nar-rative books serving as the retrieval corpus, paired with 3,000 specific question-answer pairs for eval-uation. For GovReport, we constructed a test set by sampling 500 queries, evaluated following the same inference methodology as GutenQA. We compare TopoChunker against four represen-tative paradigms to evaluate its effectiveness. To ensure a fair comparison, all dense retrieval evalu-ations use BGE-m3 as the underlying embedding model. • Fixed-Size Chunking (FC200) : A standard heuristic baseline that splits text into rigid blocks of up to 200 tokens. • Semantic Chunker (Xiao et al., 2024): Adynamic method that determines boundaries based on embedding similarity shifts at the sen-tence level. • Proposition-Level Chunking (Chen et al., 2024): A granular strategy decomposing text into self-contained atomic factual statements. • LumberChunker (Duarte et al., 2024): A re-cent approach using LLMs to predict optimal breaks. To align with TopoChunker’s setup, we deploy DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) as the backbone for both LumberChun-ker and our framework, uniformly setting the sampling temperature to 0.1 to promote deter-GutenQA Gov-report       

> FC200
> Semantic Chunker
> Proposition-Level
> LumberChunker
> TopoChunker
> 36.0 55.0
> 39.0 63.0
> 47.0 69.0
> 56.0 79.0
> 64.0 82.0
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80 Accuracy (%) Figure 2: Generation Accuracy. A heatmap illustrating the generation accuracy of various chunking methods across the GutenQA and GovReport datasets. Darker shades indicate higher accuracy.

ministic outputs. 

4.2 Quantitative Evaluation 4.2.1 Retrieval Performance 

As shown in Table 1, TopoChunker outperforms all evaluated baselines across both unstructured and highly structured domains, achieving the highest performance in both absolute retrieval (Recall@ k)and ranking quality (DCG@ k). Traditional methods exhibit limited robustness to structural variance. On the GovReport benchmark, FC200 and Semantic Chunker achieve lower R@3 scores of 32.25% and 55.37%, respectively, primar-ily because they mechanically sever logical flow. While Proposition-Level chunking performs mod-erately better by isolating factual statements, its excessive fragmentation often obscures the broader context necessary for accurate dense matching. Conversely, TopoChunker maintains contextual integrity regardless of document complexity. On the unstructured GutenQA dataset, it outperforms the LLM-guided LumberChunker, achieving an R@3 of 64.59% . This indicates that our Seman-tic Flow routing preserves self-contained contexts even in flat texts. The performance gap widens on the dense hierar-chies of GovReport, where TopoChunker achieves an R@3 of 83.26% and a D@3 of 76.59% . This margin over the strongest baselines demonstrates the effectiveness of our Topological Lineage and Semantic Signature mechanisms. By synthesizing abstract chunk titles and retaining ancestral meta-data, TopoChunker mitigates “feature dilution” in the embedding space, enabling precise semantic matching for complex queries. 

4.2.2 Generation Accuracy 

We evaluate end-to-end RAG generation using an LLM-as-a-judge pipeline powered by GPT-4. To validate the reliability of this automated metric and mitigate potential biases, we conducted a manual audit. We randomly sampled 100 generated QA pairs across all methods for blind human expert annotation. The human annotations achieved a 92% agreement rate with the GPT-4 judgments, confirming the validity of our evaluation protocol. As Figure 2 illustrates, TopoChunker outper-forms all evaluated baselines across both datasets. It achieves 64.0% accuracy on the unstructured GutenQA (+8.0% absolute improvement over the strongest baseline, LumberChunker) and reaches 82.0% on the highly structured GovReport dataset, outperforming heuristic baselines like FC200 by a wide margin. This performance advantage is primarily at-tributed to the framework’s topological context dis-ambiguation. Baseline chunkers often arbitrarily partition text, creating “semantic islands” with un-resolved anaphora (e.g., dangling pronouns like “it” or “the department”) and decoupled terminology. In contrast, TopoChunker addresses these contex-tual gaps by explicitly injecting inherited parent headers, ancestral entities, and prerequisite defini-tions into the retrieved segments. Providing the generative LLM with a logically complete and self-contained premise reduces context drift, thereby minimizing hallucinations and yielding structurally grounded responses. 

4.3 Token Efficiency 

TopoChunker dynamically scales token cost based on document complexity. Unlike LumberChun-ker’s constant 1.65 × overhead (due to iterative full-text scanning), TopoChunker decouples physical extraction from semantic reasoning. LLM con-sumption is strictly limited to the Inspector for routing and the Refiner for auditing, avoiding re-dundant processing of standard structures. We evaluate token costs on a mixed-complexity corpus (60% simple, 40% complex layouts) us-ing a standard 10,000-token document (Figure 3). For simple documents, TopoChunker consumes 8,500 tokens for routine context disambiguation, requiring fewer tokens than full-text scanning. For complex cases requiring VLM layout parsing, con-sumption peaks at 18,800 tokens. Despite this premium over LumberChunker Lumber Topo-S Topo-C Topo-A 

> 0
> 5000
> 10000
> 15000
> 20000
> 25000
> Total LLM Tokens
> 16500
> 8500
> 18800
> 12620
> S: Simple Doc
> C: Complex-Max
> A: Avg. Mixed

Figure 3: Complexity-Aware Token Consumption Anal-ysis. TopoChunker dynamically adjusts token expen-diture based on document complexity, achieving lower average costs than static agentic baselines. 

(16,500 tokens) on exclusively complex files, TopoChunker’s weighted average consumption across the mixed corpus is 12,620 tokens ( 1.26 ×). This corresponds to a 23.5% total cost reduction compared to LumberChunker, demonstrating that TopoChunker balances semantic integrity with in-ference efficiency. 

Table 2: Ablation Study: Impact of Refiner (Per-formance) and Inspector (Efficiency) on a mixed-complexity corpus. Token cost is normalized against input length.                      

> Method Recall@3 Acc. (%) Token Cost
> LumberChunker 81.38 79.0 1.65x Topo (w/o Refiner) 76.50 71.0 0.85x
> Topo-Static-P1 (Rule Only) 77.80 73.5 0.80x Topo-Static-P2 (Semantic Only) 79.20 76.8 0.95x Topo-Static-P3 (VLM Only) 82.85 81.5 1.88x
> TopoChunker (Full) 83.26 82.0 1.26x

4.4 Module-wise Ablation Study 

We conduct an ablation study on the mixed-complexity corpus to isolate the contributions of the Refiner Agent (semantic quality) and the In-spector Agent (routing efficiency). 

4.4.1 Impact of the Refiner Agent 

As Table 2 shows, extracting raw topology is in-sufficient for high-quality retrieval. Removing the Refiner ( w/o Refiner ) leads to a 6.76-point degrada-tion in Recall@3 and an 11.0% decrease in genera-tion accuracy. Without capacity auditing, oversized nodes suffer from vector dilution, and unresolved anaphora create “semantic islands” that introduce ambiguity to the generative LLM. 

4.4.2 Impact of the Inspector Agent 

Replacing the dynamic Inspector with static rout-ing pipelines highlights its role in balancing cost and performance. Lightweight static paths ( Topo-Static-P1/P2 ) lower token costs (0.80x and 0.95x) but fail to adequately process complex layouts, de-creasing Recall@3 to 77.80% and 79.20%. Conversely, forcing all documents through the VLM pipeline ( Topo-Static-P3 ) yields high accu-racy (82.85% Recall@3) but incurs a substantial 1.88x token overhead. The full TopoChunker dy-namically routes simple documents, achieving the highest overall accuracy (83.26% Recall@3) while maintaining an average token cost of 1.26x. This represents a 32.9% cost reduction over the forced VLM approach and a 23.5% reduction over Lum-berChunker. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce TopoChunker, atopology-aware framework for document chunk-ing in RAG pipelines. By mapping heterogeneous documents onto a Structured Intermediate Rep-resentation (SIR) via a dual-agent architecture— comprising an Inspector Agent for adaptive rout-ing and a Refiner Agent for semantic auditing— our approach mitigates “semantic islands” and re-solves anaphoric conflicts. Evaluations on unstruc-tured narratives (GutenQA) and highly structured reports (GovReport) demonstrate that TopoChun-ker achieves state-of-the-art retrieval and genera-tion accuracy. These results indicate that preserv-ing and explicitly injecting topological metadata is critical for robust RAG systems. 

Limitations 

While TopoChunker improves retrieval quality and structural fidelity, the current framework has two primary limitations: 

Upstream Parsing Dependency: For documents with complex visual layouts routed through Path 3, the system relies on external VLM extractors (e.g., MinerU) for physical parsing. Consequently, upstream OCR inaccuracies or layout misclassi-fications can cascade, propagating errors to the downstream Structured Intermediate Representa-tion (SIR). 

Inference Latency: Although our routing mecha-nism reduces overall token expenditure, the agentic paradigm inherently introduces higher inference latency compared to deterministic heuristic chun-kers. The reliance on instruction-tuned LLMs for dynamic routing and semantic auditing requires sequential API calls. This latency overhead poses challenges for real-time or latency-sensitive RAG applications. 

Ethics Statement 

In this work, we conduct a manual human evalu-ation to validate the reliability of our automated LLM-as-a-judge pipeline. We are committed to adhering to the ACL Ethics Policy and address the relevant ethical considerations below: 

Human Labor and Participation: The human evaluation involved annotating 100 randomly sam-pled generated QA pairs to assess generation ac-curacy. This process was conducted entirely by the authors of this paper. As the evaluation was performed by the research team as part of their academic duties, no external annotators or crowd-sourcing platforms were used, and no additional financial compensation was applicable. 

Anonymity and Bias Control: To ensure the objectivity of the evaluation, the generated outputs were shuffled and anonymized so that the authors were unaware of which specific method (baseline vs. TopoChunker) produced each response during the annotation process. No personally identifiable information (PII) was involved in the evaluation. 

Data Risks and Content Considerations: The datasets utilized in this study, GutenQA and Gov-Report, are publicly available benchmarks consist-ing of public domain literature and government documents. We have screened the sampled data and confirmed that they do not contain sensitive personal information, toxic language, or offensive content that could pose ethical risks. 

References 

Tong Chen, Hongwei Wang, Sihao Chen, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Xinran Zhao, Hongming Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2024. Dense X retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we use? In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8452–8467, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2501.12948. Abel V. Duarte, João Marques, Miguel Graça, Mariana Freire, Lin Li, and Arlindo L. Oliveira. 2024. Lum-berchunker: Long-form narrative document segmen-tation. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 6473–6486, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Günther, Isabelle Mohr, Daniel James Williams, Bo Wang, and Han Xiao. 2024. Late Chunking: Con-textual chunk embeddings using long-context embed-ding models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04701 .Arihant Jain, Purav Aggarwal, and Anoop Saladi. 2025. Autochunker: Structured text chunking and its evalu-ation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 6: Industry Track) , pages 983–995. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, Peter Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Bin Wang, Chaochao Xu, Xiaomeng Zhao, Xinwei Shen, Yiyi Su, Sihan Chen, Haojun Xu, Yutao Cai, Xinyu Xia, Fan Bian, Jian Li, Jinke Jiang, Fudan Zheng, Weikang Dong, Ruiqi Li, Zunruo Wang, and Conghui He. 2024. Mineru: An open-source solution for precise document content extraction. Preprint ,arXiv:2409.18839. Zhitong Wang, Cheng Gao, Chaojun Xiao, Yufei Huang, Shuzheng Si, Kangyang Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Wenhao Li, Tangjian Duan, Chuancheng Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Document Segmentation Matters for Retrieval-Augmented Generation. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2025) ,pages 8063–8075. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Niklas Muen-nighoff, Defu Lian, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024. C-pack: Packed resources for general chinese embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval (SIGIR ’24) , pages 641–649. ACM. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Jihao Zhao, Zhiyuan Ji, Zhaoxin Fan, Hanyu Wang, Simin Niu, Bo Tang, Feiyu Xiong, and Zhiyu Li. 2025. MoC: Mixtures of text chunking learners for retrieval-augmented generation system. In Proceed-ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 5172–5189, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Junhan Zhao, Zonghai Ji, Peng Qi, Shuo Niu, Bing Tang, Feiyang Xiong, and Ze Li. 2024. Meta-chunking: Learning efficient text segmentation via logical per-ception. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12788 .Zihan Zhong, Han Liu, Xiaobo Cui, Xinyu Zhang, and Zheng Qin. 2025. Mix-of-granularity: Optimize the chunking granularity for retrieval-augmented genera-tion. In Proceedings of the 31st International Confer-ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2025) ,pages 5756–5774, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. A Resolving Contextual Fragmentation 

(a) Unstructured Narrative (GutenQA Dataset) → Routed via Path 2: Semantic Flow Source Document ( Adventures of Huckleberry Finn )TopoChunker Output (Self-Contained Atom) 

...And next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every time he told it he spread it more and more, till by-and-by he said they rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back was all over saddle-boils. 

Jim was monstrous proud about it , and he got so he wouldn’t hardly notice the other niggers. Niggers would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any nigger in that country. ... Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they had, just for a sight of that five-center piece ; but they wouldn’t touch it, because the devil had had his hands on it. Jim was most ruined for a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches. Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling... 

[Path] Adventures of Huckleberry Finn → Content →

Segment X 

[Signature] Jim’s Witch Story Fame and Pride 

[Context Supplement] 

→ it : Jim’s story about being bewitched by witches. 

→ five-center piece : The five cents Tom laid on the table. 

[Text] 

“Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he got so he wouldn’t hardly notice the other niggers. Niggers would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any nigger in that country. ... Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they wouldn’t touch it, because the devil had had his hands on it. Jim was most ruined for a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches.” 

(b) Structured Document (GovReport Dataset) → Routed via Path 1: Structural Rule Source Document ( GovReport / GAO-19-504 ) TopoChunker Output (Structured JSONL Atom) 

...NASA awarded firm-fixed-price contracts in 2014 to Boeing and SpaceX, valued at up to $4.2 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively, for the development of crew transportation systems... The Commercial Crew Program manages two processes in order to support the contractors’ uncrewed test flight... 

Contractors Are Making Progress on Vehicles, but Certification Date Remains Unclear Both contractors have made progress building and testing hardware, including SpaceX’s uncrewed test flight. But continued schedule delays and remaining work for the contractors and the program create continued uncertainty about when either contractor will be certified to begin conducting operational missions to the ISS. 

The program has made progress reviewing the contractors’ certification paperwork, but contractor delays in submitting evidence for NASA approval may compound a ’bow wave’ of work, which creates uncertainty about when either contractor will be certified... 

[Path] GovReport → GAO-19-504 

[Signature] Commercial Crew Program Certification Delays and Schedule Uncertainty 

[Context Supplement] 

→ Both contractors : Boeing and SpaceX. 

→ The program : The Commercial Crew Program. 

[Text] 

“Contractors Are Making Progress on Vehicles, but Certification Date Remains Unclear paragraphs: Both contractors have made progress building and testing hardware, including SpaceX’s uncrewed test flight. But continued schedule delays and remaining work for the contractors and the program create continued uncertainty...” 

Figure 4: Qualitative Examples of TopoChunker output resolving contextual fragmentation. (a) On the GutenQA dataset, the lack of heading hierarchy triggers Path 2: Semantic Flow. TopoChunker actively resolves semantic islands by explicitly mapping dangling pronouns to their ancestral entities in the Context Supplement . (b) On the GovReport dataset, explicit hierarchies trigger Path 1: Structural Rule. Generic references are successfully resolved to specific entities, ensuring chunks remain semantically self-contained for downstream RAG. B End-to-End Workflow: From Raw PDF to Semantic Atoms 

Input Document (PDF Content) 

Chapter 1: General Provisions on Data Security Management Article 1 [Data Classification and Grading Scope] Based on the impact of data leakage on the Company and national security, data is categorized into three levels and five categories. (1) Level 1 (Top Secret) : Refers to data that, if leaked, would directly lead to the loss of the Company’s core competitiveness or seriously threaten national security. The scope is strictly limited to: Core Technology: Proprietary large model training weights (Checkpoints), unpatented chip architecture diagrams, and hardware security module (HSM) Root Keys. (2) Level 2 (Confidential) : Refers to data that, if leaked, could cause significant damage to the Company’s reputation or finances. The scope includes: User Privacy: Real-name user databases containing ID numbers, facial recognition features, and bank card numbers. Business Secrets: Key Account (KA) lists in CRM systems, exclusive supply chain pricing agreements, and quarterly detailed financial statements (unpublished). Source Code: Application-layer code for non-core business systems and API interface documentation. (3) Level 3 (Internal Use) : Refers to data known only to internal employees, including administrative notices, desensitized weekly operational reports, internal directories, and general technical documentation. 

Article 2 [Access Control Strategies for Each Level] Unauthorized access to sensitive data is strictly prohibited. The circulation and access of data at all levels must comply with the following mandatory regulations: (1) For Level 1 Data: Implement a "Zero Trust" access strategy. It must be viewed via intranet terminals within a physically isolated Clean Room. Any form of downloading, exporting, or transmission via the Internet is strictly prohibited. Access requires dual approval (Double-Check) from the CTO and the Compliance Director. (2) For Level 2 Data: Export is strictly prohibited in principle. If export is necessary, it must be approved by a department head at L8 level or above, and the system must forcibly add an invisible Digital Watermark containing the employee ID and timestamp. (3) For Level 3 Data: Access and circulation are permitted on Company intranet office terminals, but uploading to unauthorized public cloud storage platforms is prohibited. (4) For Level 4 Data (Public/Desensitized): Implement a "Pre-release Review" system. Although such data is permitted for external disclosure (e.g., financial report summaries, marketing materials), it must undergo content compliance review by PR or Legal departments before release. (5) For Audit and Monitoring: Implement full-link "Behavioral Profiling" monitoring. All cross-level data access behaviors must retain immutable Audit Logs for a retention period of no less than 12 months. The system must deploy UEBA policies to trigger real-time blocking. 

Chapter 2: Organizational Guarantee and Legal Liability Article 1 [Organizational Structure and Responsibilities] The Company establishes the Data Security Committee (DSC) as the highest decision-making body, with the CEO serving as the group leader. Heads of business lines (BP) are the primary persons responsible for data security in their respective departments and must sign the "Annual Data Security Responsibility Letter." 

Article 2 [Data Security Emergency Response] In the event of security incidents such as data leakage, tampering, or loss, the discoverer shall report to the Security Operations Center (SOC) within 15 minutes. For major leakage incidents involving Level 1 or Level 2 data, the SOC must activate the Level 1 Emergency Plan within 1 hour. 

Article 3 [Personnel Training and Assessment] The HR Department, in conjunction with the Information Security Department, shall organize company-wide data security awareness training quarterly. Personnel in core positions involving contact with Level 1 or Level 2 data must pass the "Data Security Compliance Exam" annually. 

Figure 5: The raw text content extracted from the input PDF document used in the evaluation case study. This document features complex hierarchical structures (Chapters, Articles, Clauses) and domain-specific terminology (e.g., "L8 level", "Zero Trust"). Intermediate Representation (Markdown Stream) 

# Chapter 1: General Provisions on Data Security Management ## Article 1 [Data Classification and Grading Scope] Based on the impact of data leakage on the Company and national security, data is categorized into three levels and five categories. 

### (1) Level 1 (Top Secret): Refers to data that, if leaked, would directly lead to the loss of the Company’s core competitiveness or seriously threaten national security. The scope is strictly limited to: Core Technology: Proprietary large model training weights (Checkpoints), unpatented chip architecture diagrams, and hardware security module (HSM) Root Keys. 

### (2) Level 2 (Confidential): Refers to data that, if leaked, could cause significant damage to the Company’s reputation or finances. The scope includes: User Privacy: Real-name user databases containing ID numbers, facial recognition features, and bank card numbers. Business Secrets: Key Account (KA) lists in CRM systems, exclusive supply chain pricing agreements, and quarterly detailed financial statements (unpublished)... 

### (3) Level 3 (Internal Use): Refers to data known only to internal employees, including administrative notices, desensitized weekly operational reports, internal directories, and general technical documentation. 

## Article 2 [Access Control Strategies for Each Level] Unauthorized access to sensitive data is strictly prohibited. The circulation and access of data at all levels must comply with the following mandatory regulations: 

### (1) For Level 1 Data: Implement a "Zero Trust" access strategy. It must be viewed via intranet terminals within a physically isolated Clean Room. Any form of downloading, exporting, or transmission via the Internet is strictly prohibited... 

### (2) For Level 2 Data: Export is strictly prohibited in principle. If export is necessary, it must be approved by a department head at L8 level or above, and the system must forcibly add an invisible Digital Watermark containing the employee ID and timestamp. 

... # Chapter 2: Organizational Guarantee and Legal Liability ## Article 1 [Organizational Structure and Responsibilities] The Company establishes the Data Security Committee (DSC) as the highest decision-making body, with the CEO serving as the group leader. Heads of business lines (BP) are the primary persons responsible for data security in their respective departments... 

## Article 2 [Data Security Emergency Response] In the event of security incidents such as data leakage, tampering, or loss, the discoverer shall report to the Security Operations Center (SOC) within 15 minutes. For major leakage incidents involving Level 1 or Level 2 data, the SOC must activate the Level 1 Emergency Plan within 1 hour. 

... 

Figure 6: The standardized Structured Intermediate Representation (SIR) generated in Stage 2. The parser has successfully mapped visual font cues to a logical Markdown stream (#, ##, ###), preserving the hierarchical skeleton for the downstream Refiner Agent. Full-Content Knowledge Base (JSONL Output) 

[{

"path": "Chapter 1: General Provisions > Article 1", "signature": "Data Classification and Grading Scope", "Context Supplement": { 

"three levels" : "Level 1 (Top Secret), Level 2 (Confidential), and Level 3 (Internal Use)", 

"five categories" : "Core Technology, User Privacy, Business Secrets, Source Code, and General Internal Docs" }, "text": "Article 1 [Data Classification and Grading Scope] Based on the impact of data leakage on the Company and national security, data is categorized into three levels and five categories . (1) Level 1 (Top Secret): Refers to data that, if leaked, would directly lead to the loss of the Company’s core competitiveness. Scope limited to: Core Technology: Proprietary large model training weights (Checkpoints), unpatented chip architecture diagrams, and hardware security module (HSM) Root Keys... (2) Level 2 (Confidential): ... Business Secrets: Key Account (KA) lists in CRM systems, exclusive supply chain pricing agreements..." 

},

{

"path": "Chapter 1: General Provisions > Article 2", "signature": "Access Control Strategies for Each Level", "Context Supplement": { 

"Level 1 Data" : "Top Secret data (e.g., Core Technology, large model weights, Root Keys) as defined in Article 1", 

"Level 2 Data" : "Confidential data (e.g., User Privacy, Business Secrets, Source Code) as defined in Article 1" }, "text": "Article 2 [Access Control Strategies for Each Level] Unauthorized access to sensitive data is strictly prohibited. The circulation and access of data at all levels must comply with the following mandatory regulations: (1) For Level 1 Data : Implement a "Zero Trust"access strategy... (2) For Level 2 Data : Export is strictly prohibited in principle. If export is necessary, it must be approved by a department head at L8 level or above, and the system must forcibly add an invisible Digital Watermark containing the employee ID and timestamp." 

},

{

"path": "Chapter 2: Organizational Guarantee and Legal Liability > Article 1", "signature": "Organizational Structure and Responsibilities", "Context Supplement": { 

"data security" : "The protection of Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 categorized data across all business lines", 

"Annual Data Security Responsibility Letter" : "A mandatory internal accountability document linking department heads to data compliance" }, "text": "Chapter 2: Organizational Guarantee and Legal Liability. Article 1 [Organizational Structure and Responsibilities] The Company establishes the Data Security Committee (DSC) as the highest decision-making body, with the CEO serving as the group leader. Heads of business lines (BP) are the primary persons responsible for data security in their respective departments and must sign the " Annual Data Security Responsibility Letter ."" 

}]

Figure 7: The structured JSONL output generated by TopoChunker. TopoChunker moves beyond trivial dictionary definitions to perform cross-chunk semantic resolution—such as automatically fetching the Article 1 definitions for Level 1 Data and Level 2 Data when processing Article 2—significantly mitigating retrieval ambiguity for downstream LLMs. Furthermore, because the source document features a large number of tables and complex layouts, the Inspector Agent adaptively routes it through Path 3: Visual Topology, ensuring the structural integrity of these non-textual elements. C Agent System Prompts 

Table 3 presents the core system prompts utilized by the dual-agent architecture. The Inspector Agent executes the multi-criteria reasoning loop for adaptive routing, while the Refiner Agent enforces strict verbatim preservation during semantic auditing and contextual disambiguation. 

Table 3: System Prompts for the Inspector and Refiner Agents. 

Part I: Inspector Agent 

Agent Role: Strategic Cognitive Planner for document routing. 

Core Task: You will be provided solely with a Document ID. You must autonomously invoke analytical tools to extract the document’s structural fingerprint ( ⃗f ) and determine the optimal routing pathway by heuristically balancing three dimensions: computational cost (token expenditure), risk of information loss, and structural fidelity. 

Step 1 (Active Probing via Tools): Using the provided Document ID, invoke the available lightweight API tools (e.g., 

analyze_metadata , probe_layout_complexity , test_rule_adherence ) to perform sparse sampling. Do not attempt to process the raw document text. Rely strictly on the JSON responses from these tools to assess visual element density, scanned status, and textual hierarchy clarity. 

Step 2 (Multi-Criteria Reasoning & Routing): Evaluate the tool outputs to balance the trade-offs and select one routing path: • Select VISUAL_TOPOLOGY (Path 3) for scanned or visually complex documents to prevent structural loss despite higher computational cost. • Select STRUCTURAL_RULE (Path 1) for digital documents with clear heading hierarchies to minimize cost. • Select SEMANTIC_FLOW (Path 2) for unstructured narratives to prioritize semantic continuity. 

Output Format: Output the final decision strictly as a JSON object: {"selected_path": "VISUAL_TOPOLOGY" | "STRUCTURAL_RULE" | "SEMANTIC_FLOW", "confidence_score": float, "risk_score": float, "reason": "string (concise justification based on tool observations)" }

Part II: Refiner Agent 

Agent Role: Expert Document Contextualization Agent. 

Core Task: Execute semantic auditing and topological context disambiguation to transform raw document sections into self-contained Semantic Atoms optimized for RAG. 

Core Principle: Preserve the original text verbatim. You must not rewrite or paraphrase the text body. Your value is added strictly through Metadata Headers and Contextual Disambiguation. 

Strategy 1 (Title Generation): Create a concise (3-8 words) title capturing the main topic. Do not recycle the first sentence. Maximize lexical discriminability. 

Strategy 2 (Contextual Disambiguation): Scan for unresolved pronouns or isolated references. If the referent exists within the chunk, do nothing. If missing, invoke the SIR_Query tool to retrieve ancestor nodes. If the definitive entity is found, create a "Context Supplement" field. 

Capacity Auditing & Operational Rules: If the system flags the current node as oversized ( is_oversized = True ), you must invoke the Semantic_Slicer tool first to explicitly identify optimal sentence boundaries, and then process each resulting segment independently. Do not merge them back. 

Output Format: Wrap results in <final_chunks> tags as a JSON list of strings. Each string must follow this template: ["# {Semantic Signature} Context Supplement: {Entity Mappings} // Omit if unnecessary {Original Text Content Verbatim}" ]