Title: Automating Formal Verification with Reinforcement Learning and Recursive Inference

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30914v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:54:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 140

Markdown Content:
# Automating Formal Verification with Reinforcement Learning and Recursive Inference 

by 

# Max Tan 

S.B. in Physics and Artificial Intelligence and Decision Making, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2025. Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF ENGINEERING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE at the MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY May 2026 

© 2026 Max Tan. All rights reserved. The author hereby grants to MIT a nonexclusive, worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free license to exercise any and all rights under copyright, including to reproduce, preserve, distribute and publicly display copies of the thesis, or release the thesis under an open-access license. Authored by: Max Tan Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science May 22, 2026 Certified by: Max Tegmark Professor of Physics, Thesis Supervisor Accepted by: Katrina LaCurts Chair, Master of Engineering Thesis Committee 

> arXiv:2605.30914v1 [cs.LG] 29 May 2026

2Automating Formal Verification with Reinforcement Learning and Recursive Inference 

by Max Tan Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science on May 22, 2026 in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF ENGINEERING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE 

ABSTRACT 

Automated formal verification remains challenging for large language models because data for proof assistants and verification-aware languages is scarce, and correctness depends on satisfying precise machine-checkable specifications rather than producing plausible code. This thesis studies how verifier environments can improve LLM generation of verified programs and proofs through reinforcement learning from verifiable rewards (RLVR) and verifier-guided inference-time search. First, we train open-source models in Dafny with RLVR using Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) and related variants, assembling generated candidates into complete programs and scoring them with compiler and verifier outcomes. Initial experiments on an APPS-derived Dafny dataset increased verified reward from 2.2% to 58.1%, but revealed specification hacking, where models exploit weak formal specifications instead of implementing the intended solutions. After filtering underspecified and vulnerable tasks, multi-turn RLVR on the refined benchmark improves the verified pass rate from 9.7% to 31.1%. Second, we develop a verifier-guided inference scaffold in Lean that treats proof generation as structured search over decomposed subgoals, verifier feedback, diagnostics, and repair. With a fixed base model, the full scaffold with proof reviser improves pass rate on an initial VeriCoding pilot set from 46.2% under direct repair to 69.2%. On the larger VERINA dataset, whole-task decomposition plus proof reviser solves 7 of 42 previously unsolved tasks. We also introduce Dalek-Bench, a repository-scale Lean benchmark derived from the Rust 

curve25519-dalek verification project; preliminary results remain weak, indicating that stronger progress evaluation and task-specific tool-use policies are still needed. Overall, formal verifiers become useful to LLMs when they are treated not just as checkers, but as sources of reward, feedback, and search control. However, this only succeeds when the environment supplies clean data, robust specifications, and structured ways to act on verifier feedback. Benchmarks and code are available on request from maxt114@mit.edu Thesis supervisor: Max Tegmark Title: Professor of Physics 34Acknowledgments 

I am deeply grateful to the many people who made this thesis possible. First, I would like to thank my advisor, Professor Max Tegmark, who introduced me to the field of formal verification and brought so much excitement to this problem space. Our weekly meetings were motivating not only technically, but also because they helped me keep sight of the real-world stakes of this work. Your feedback throughout the project, and especially on this final thesis, has been invaluable. I also want to thank the other members of the lab, particularly David Baek, Ionel Chiosa, and Leo Yao. Our weekly lunches were always full of interesting conversation, and each of you played an important role in making this thesis what it is today, from engineering advice and technical feedback to broader research guidance. I am also grateful to the mentors and collaborators who shaped my broader research path at MIT. Thank you to my undergraduate advisors, Professor Janet Conrad and Professor Jing Kong, for their guidance throughout my time as an undergraduate. I would also like to thank Yufeng (Bright) Ye, Professor Kevin O’Brien, Professor Jesse Thaler, Dana Choi, Professor Dylan Hadfield-Menell, and Joyce Luo for their mentorship, collaboration, and encouragement at different stages of my research journey. To my family—Mom, Dad, and Elliot—thank you for supporting me throughout my entire academic journey. I would not be where I am today without your support and encouragement. Finally, to all of my friends at MIT: you know who you are. This place has been special to me because of all of you. 56Contents 

Acknowledgments 5

List of Figures 9

List of Tables 11 

1 Introduction 13 

1.1 Emerging Cybersecurity Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 1.2 The Relevance of Formal Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 1.3 The Rise of Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 1.4 Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 1.5 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

2 Background 21 

2.1 Formal Verification Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2.2 Automated Formal Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 2.2.1 Neural Theorem Proving on Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 2.2.2 LLMs for Vericoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 2.2.3 Autoformalization and Spec Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

3 Benchmarks 37 

3.1 Vericoding Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 3.2 Dalek Bench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

4 Part I: Post-Training 49 

4.1 Preliminaries: Reinforcement Learning Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 4.2 Setup: Models, Data, Infrastructure, Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 4.3 RL from Verifier Feedback: Initial Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 4.4 Specification Hacking: Discovery and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 4.5 Improving the Pipeline: Data Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 4.6 Multi-Turn Training with Verifier Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 4.7 Discussion: Reflections on Data-Scarce RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76 

5 Part II: Agentic Scaffolding 83 

5.1 Preliminaries: Agentic Systems for Formal Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 5.2 System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 5.2.1 Recursive Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 75.2.2 Verification MCP and Tool Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 5.2.3 Progress Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 5.3 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 5.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104 5.5 Discussion and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 5.5.1 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 5.5.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116 

Conclusion 121 

References 125 8List of Figures 

3.1 Worksheet structure of an example Dalek Bench task . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 3.2 Distribution of helper goals per Dalek Bench task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 4.1 Single-turn Dafny RLVR training and validation pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . 55 4.2 Reward trajectory for the initial single-turn Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . 59 4.3 Logged validation diagnostics for the initial Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . . 61 4.4 Reward trajectories across initial and filtered Dafny RLVR runs . . . . . . . 66 4.5 Diagram of the multi-turn verifier-feedback Dafny RLVR environment . . . . 67 4.6 Training metrics for the multi-turn Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 4.7 Average turns per episode during multi-turn Dafny RLVR . . . . . . . . . . . 73 4.8 Token lengths during the multi-turn Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 5.1 Overview of the verifier-in-the-loop Lean scaffold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 5.2 Diagram of recursive proof decomposition for Lean verified coding . . . . . . 92 5.3 Diagram of the progress-evaluation control flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 5.4 Budget-efficiency curves on the Vericoding pilot set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 5.5 Captured tool-call usage by benchmark and tool group . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 5.6 Failure-mode counts by benchmark and failure group . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 910 List of Tables 

3.1 Review of evaluation benchmarks grouped by setting and thesis role . . . . . 38 3.2 Vericoding Benchmark task counts by source and language . . . . . . . . . . 40 3.3 Initial Vericoding Benchmark performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 3.4 Dalek Bench helper burden by proof topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 4.1 Prompt-level statistics for the Dafny APPS-derived dataset. . . . . . . . . . 57 4.2 Initial RLVR training configuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 4.3 Aggregate reward statistics for the initial Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . . . 60 4.4 Specification-hacking patterns in the initial Dafny RLVR run . . . . . . . . . 63 4.5 Composition of the quality-filtered Dafny tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 4.6 Checkpoint rewards: initial APPS-derived versus filtered Dafny RLVR runs . 67 4.7 Multi-turn RL training configuration with online verifier feedback. . . . . . . 70 4.8 Held-out comparison of single-turn and multi-turn Dafny RLVR . . . . . . . 71 4.9 Summary of logged multi-turn Dafny RLVR trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . 75 4.10 Main Part I summary of Dafny RLVR results with Vericoding references . . 77 5.1 Tool classes exposed through the MCP-style layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 5.2 Headline verification results across benchmarks and scaffolds . . . . . . . . . 107 5.3 Scaffold configuration comparisons on the Vericoding pilot . . . . . . . . . . 108 11 12 Chapter 1 Introduction 

# 1.1 Emerging Cybersecurity Risks 

The cybersecurity landscape is undergoing a huge shift, and AI is at the center. Modern AI systems can now find and exploit software flaws on their own, at speeds and complexities that are hard to match. In late 2025, Anthropic claimed that a Chinese state-sponsored group had used Claude Code (Anthropic’s AI coding assistant) to run a cyber-espionage campaign against government agencies, banks, and chemical manufacturers [1]. The AI did 80–90% of the work itself: scanning targets for weaknesses, stealing passwords, moving deeper into networks, and copying out sensitive data, all at thousands of operations per minute. Anthropic called it the first known case of a large-scale cyberattack carried out almost entirely by an AI. Around the same time, AI began showing up in attacks both as a direct weapon and as a way into vast networks. In March 2026, attackers slipped malicious code into LiteLLM, a tool that many companies use to connect their applications to AI models [2]. Several companies were infected automatically: their AI coding assistants, given broad permission to install software, downloaded and ran the tampered version on their own. On the offensive side, the security startup CodeWall has demonstrated autonomous AI agents finding critical security 13 flaws in live systems within hours: a two-hour break-in to McKinsey’s internal AI platform that exposed tens of millions of internal consultant messages [3]; a complete takeover of an AI recruiting platform that the agent infiltrated by phoning the company’s voice bot [4]; and similar hacking into Bain & Company [5]. IBM estimates that roughly one in six recent corporate data breaches in 2025 involved AI-driven components [6], which is bound to increase further. Rather than replacing past threats, AI incidents amplify existing cyber risks that continue to cause major damage. In 2024, a faulty CrowdStrike software update crashed millions of Windows computers worldwide, grounding flights and disrupting hospital operations [7]. In 2021, a configuration error took Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp offline for hours [8]. And in late 2025, Amazon’s own Kiro AI coding agent, which was granted autonomous access to a live AWS environment, decided that the best fix for a routine issue was to “delete and recreate the environment,” triggering a 13-hour outage of AWS Cost Explore. Amazon employees even reported a second, similar AI-related incident shortly after [9]. Conventional defenses such as testing, code review, and even AI-driven bug detectors, remain essential but are fundamentally limited. They can only check behavior on a sample of inputs and not every possible input, scenario, or clever attack. Formal verification offers something stronger: a way to mathematically prove that software behaves correctly on every possible input. The technique is mature and proven in deployment, but, as we next discuss, gated by the expert labor required to use it. 

# 1.2 The Relevance of Formal Verification 

Formal verification is the practice of mathematically proving that a piece of software meets a precise specification of what it should do. Rather than running a program on test inputs and observing the outputs, the developer writes down what correctness means for their particular function (e.g., the program never reads memory it shouldn’t, it always terminates within 14 a bounded number of steps, it correctly implements a particular protocol). We can then construct a proof that the program always satisfies that specification, checked end-to-end by a machine. The idea dates to the 1960s, when computer scientists such as Tony Hoare and Edsger Dijkstra developed logical methods for reasoning about programs [10]. For decades, the work remained largely theoretical. Even small proofs required much human effort. The breakthrough came as automated reasoning matured, and two complementary strands of tools emerged. Interactive proof assistants such as Coq (recently renamed Rocq [11]) and Lean [12] give the human full control over the proof while relying on the machine to check every step. Verification languages such as Dafny [13], F ∗ [14], and Verus [15] attach proofs directly to a programming language and offload the routine logic to automated solvers, asking the developer for help only with the parts that require genuine non-repetitive insight. The two approaches trade-off automation and expressive power: more automation makes proofs faster to write but limits what they can express; more interactivity makes proofs slower but allows a wider range of mathematical reasoning. These tools have produced verified software at a scale that was unimaginable two decades ago. AWS has formally verified Cedar, its open-source authorization language used by Cloudflare, MongoDB, AWS itself, and others (and recently accepted into the Cloud Native Computing Foundation), with a Lean specification rigorously tested against the production Rust implementation [16]. Verus is in active industrial use at Microsoft and Amazon, and underpinned two of the three best papers at OSDI 2024 (Anvil, VERISMO) [17,18]. The same technology is reshaping mathematics: Lean’s Mathlib library has formalized hundreds of thousands of theorems and is now used by working mathematicians [19]; Peter Scholze’s Liquid Tensor Experiment fully formalized a frontier result in advanced mathematics [20]; and Terence Tao formalized his polynomial Freiman–Ruzsa theorem in Lean in 2023 and is now formalizing his classic textbook Analysis I chapter by chapter [21,22]. Additionally, driven by AI, Harmonic’s Aristotle has independently formalized and proved long-standing 15 open Erdős problems (including Problems 728 and 1026) that had resisted human effort for decades [23]. The cost of verification, however, concentrates at two distinct bottlenecks. The first is 

specification : translating an informal description of what software should do into a machine-readable form. A specification that is subtly wrong or incomplete will yield an inconsequential proof as the bug survives. Specification writing is far from trivial: for the Liquid Tensor Experiment mentioned earlier, translating just the statement of the key intermediate theorem into Lean took a team of expert mathematicians an entire month [24]. The second barrier is proof generation : constructing the argument that a particular implementation actually meets its specification, step by step. Proof-to-code ratios in published verification efforts often run from 3:1 to 10:1, and large projects often take years of expert effort [15,25]. The community that can do this productively at scale remains small, and as a result, formal verification today protects a narrow set of high-stakes components such as kernels, compilers, cryptography and authorization systems, while the surrounding software that run our secure systems ship unverified. Both remain open research challenges, and both are precisely where recent advances in Large Language Models are making their sharpest inroads. 

# 1.3 The Rise of Large Language Models 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have undergone a rapid shift in their code and reasoning capabilities, from generating plausible-looking snippets to acting as autonomous software engineers capable of reading, executing, debugging, and reasoning about large codebases end-to-end. The clearest sign of this shift is the proliferation of agentic coding tools: Claude Code, OpenAI’s o-series, and similar systems now write production code, navigate complex repositories, propose and apply multi-file edits, and iterate on their own outputs in response to test failures, all without human guidance between steps [26,27]. At the frontier, the depth of this code understanding has crossed a qualitative threshold. Claude Mythos Preview, 16 Anthropic’s most capable unreleased model, is claimed to have discovered thousands of previously unknown vulnerabilities across every major operating system and web browser (including a 27-year-old bug in OpenBSD, and a 17-year-old remote code execution flaw in FreeBSD) despite receiving no explicit security training. The capabilities simply emerged as a result of improvements in code comprehension, step-by-step reasoning, and autonomous tool use [28,29]. The same period has seen a parallel revolution in formal mathematical theorem proving. Formal theorem proving is a natural testbed for LLMs because it is objectively verifiable: a proof either compiles in Lean or it does not, with no partial credit. In 2024, Google DeepMind’s AlphaProof achieved silver-medal performance at the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO), the first AI system to do so in a formally verified setting [30]. In 2025, Harmonic AI’s Aristotle went further, achieving IMO gold-medal performance and independently formalizing and proving long-standing open Erdős problems in Lean [31]. The open-source community has tracked closely, producing a rapid succession of systems each improving on the last. DeepSeek-Prover trained a model to write proofs and then used Lean’s automatic checker as a teacher using Reinforcement Learning, letting the system bootstrap its own improvement [32]. Goedel-Prover repeated this cycle for smaller models, yet still outperfomring DeepSeek-Prover by nearly eight percentage points on standard benchmarks [33]. Seed-Prover 1.5 took the approach further still, solving nearly 88% of problems on PutnamBench—a set of competition and graduate-level mathematics problems that a generation ago would have been considered out of reach for any automated system [34]. These results trace to two complementary techniques that this thesis is organized around. 1. Post-training : Training the model directly on formal verification tasks, often on large collections of existing proofs (Goedel-Prover started from every verified proof in Mathlib [33]). Using the verifier as an automatic judge, the model can also learn from its own successes and failures without any human labeling (the mechanism behind both DeepSeek-Prover and AlphaProof [32,35]), then feed successful proofs back into 17 training so the model progressively improves on harder problems, and also compress the knowledge of a large model into a smaller, faster one (distillation). 2. Inference-time Scaffolding : improving how the model searches at test time without any additional training, by generating many candidate proofs in parallel and keeping the first that works (Goedel-Prover tried up to 25,600 candidates for its hardest problems [33]), exploring proof steps like branches of a tree and backtracking when a path fails (used by DeepSeek-Prover to recover from dead ends [32]), letting the model read the verifier’s error messages and try again the way a programmer iterates on compiler feedback, and breaking a hard problem into smaller independently solvable steps before tackling each one (the core idea behind DeepSeek-Prover V2 [36]). The critical enabler for LLM-based approaches is the verifier : because Lean, Dafny, and Verus provide binary, automatic, and deterministic feedback on every proof attempt, they act as an ideal reward signal for correctness. The question this thesis addresses is whether these techniques transfer from formal mathematics to the harder problem of automatically generating verified software a non-trivial domain transfer. 

# 1.4 Thesis Overview 

Can we automate the generation of formally verified code from written specifications? While recent work in automated theorem proving has shown that LLMs can learn to construct formal mathematical proofs, formal software verification presents a harder challenge: programs require specifications that must be conceived alongside implementation, the corpus of verified code is orders of magnitude smaller than mathematical proof libraries, and the space of possible solutions and “proof paths" is less structured than the action space available in mathematics. This thesis investigates two complementary families of approach to closing this gap, evaluated primarily on the Vericoding benchmark [37] and a new real-world benchmark 18 we introduce derived from the Dalek elliptic curve cryptography library [38]—a formally verified package used in production systems including Signal. 1. Part I: Post-Training First we investigate post-training Large Language Models to improve on Dafny verification tasks. We apply long chain-of-thought reinforcement learning from verifier feedback, using similar principles that powered successes like Seed-Prover and Goedel-Prover, but targeting formally verified code generation rather than mathematical theorem proving. Initial experiments showed promising results, but deeper analysis revealed evidence of reward hacking: models were exploiting structural holes in the proposed problems rather than learning genuine formal verification reasoning. Diagnosing and blocking this hacking behavior led to more honest baselines and motivated a sequence of further developments: supervised fine-tuning on curated Dafny examples to establish stronger latent knowledge, a multi-turn training environment that exposes models to more refinement across multiple repair attempts, and distillation through rollouts from stronger state-of-the-art models to transfer reasoning capabilities into smaller models. 2. Part II: Inference-time Scaffolding We then investigate the effectiveness of tech-niques to improve performance at inference-time as a complementary path. Rather than improving the model itself, we build a recursive agent that decomposes hard verification problems into independently solvable subproblems (initially inspired by Hilbert [39]), coordinating a set of specialized models to handle each subproblem recursively. Two additions proved key: smart tool calling, which gives the agent access to relevant context such as type signatures, library documentation, and relevant lemmas, and a progress evaluator that monitors whether a line of reasoning is making headway, cutting off token-intensive dead ends. Together, these additions improved both the quality and efficiency of the agent’s verification attempts. The two parts go hand in hand by design. Post-training builds models that learn 19 verification techniques by leveraging the strong mathematical and coding skills of current LLM models, while scaffolding extracts the most from these models at test time without additional training. Understanding how both perform helps seriously inform the design space for future work on LLM-assisted formal verification. 

# 1.5 Contributions 

This thesis contributes: (1) an empirical study of post-training for formally verified code generation, including reinforcement learning from verifier feedback, “specification hacking" analysis, dataset filtering, and multi-turn verifier-feedback training; (2) an inference-time scaffolding system for Lean verified coding that combines recursive decomposition, verifier feedback, tool access, and progress evaluation; and (3) benchmark evaluations on the Veri-coding benchmark [37] and the construction of a new Dalek-derived verified-code benchmark, 

Dalek Bench .

Collaboration and attribution. Except where noted here, the work in this thesis was performed by me. David Baek helped set up reinforcement-learning infrastructure and advised on training practices such as using the open-source framework verl . Ionel Chiosa helped propose the initial APPS-derived dataset for post-training, the harder filtered dataset after identifying specification hacking, and helped run the first flat Codex evaluations on VERINA, BigNum, and VerifCogen. Leo Yao contributed to early brainstorming around the scaffolding system. All remaining experimental design, implementation, analysis, and writing were performed by me. 20 Chapter 2 Background 

# 2.1 Formal Verification Languages 

Formal verification uses mathematical reasoning to prove that a program, protocol, or theorem satisfies a precise specification. Unlike standard testing, which samples executions, formal verification asks a checker to establish that a property holds for all executions admitted by the model. In software verification, the specification may include preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants, data-structure invariants, refinement properties, or memory-safety conditions. In theorem proving, the specification is usually a formal mathematical statement, and the artifact to be checked is a proof. The central object shared across verification systems is the proof obligation : a logical condition that must be established for verification to succeed. Different systems expose proof obligations at different levels of abstraction. SMT-backed verifiers such as Dafny and Verus generate verification conditions and prove many of them automatically using solvers. Interactive theorem provers such as Lean expose proof states directly and require the user to construct proof terms, usually through tactics. These differences matter for LLM-based systems because they determine what the model must generate, what feedback it receives, and how much work can be delegated to the verifier. 21 This section introduces the verification systems most relevant to the thesis. Dafny represents the auto-active, SMT-backed style of verified programming; Lean represents the interactive theorem-proving style; and Verus and F* provide adjacent points of comparison for recent LLM-based verified-code systems. 

# Dafny 

Dafny is a verification-aware programming language with native specification constructs and a static program verifier for functional correctness [40]. Its specifications include preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants, frame conditions, termination metrics, and ghost state. Verified Dafny programs can also be compiled to ordinary programming languages such as C#, Java, JavaScript, Go, and Python [13,41]. The user writes executable code together with annotations, and Dafny translates the annotated program into verification conditions that are discharged by automated reasoning.              

> 1method SumN(n: nat) returns (s: nat)
> 2ensures s == n * (n + 1) / 2
> 3{
> 4var i := 0;
> 5s := 0;
> 6while i < n
> 7invariant 0 <= i <= n
> 8invariant s == i * (i + 1) / 2
> 9{
> 10 i := i + 1;
> 11 s := s + i;
> 12 }
> 13 }

Listing 2.1: A Dafny loop invariant used to prove a postcondition. The method computes 22 1 + · · · + n; the invariant states the closed form for the partial sum after each iteration, giving the verifier the inductive fact needed to establish the final result. The executable part of this method computes a running sum. The method-level behavioral specification is the postcondition, while the loop invariants are intermediate specifications that expose the inductive structure of the argument. Dafny must prove that the invariants hold initially, are preserved by each loop iteration, and, together with the negation of the loop guard, imply the postcondition when the loop exits. In this example, the invariant s == i * (i + 1) / 2 states that the partial sum is correct up to the current loop index; when the loop terminates, i == n , yielding the postcondition. This interaction model is important for LLMs. In Dafny, the model often does not need to produce a long explicit proof script. Instead, it must generate compact annotations that expose the right intermediate facts to the solver. The difficulty is that verifier acceptance alone is not enough: an implementation may verify against a specification that is too weak to capture the intended behavior, while a correct implementation and specification may still fail to verify without sufficiently strong invariants, assertions, or helper lemmas. 

# Lean 

Lean is an interactive theorem prover based on dependent type theory, with a trusted kernel that checks proof terms. In Lean, propositions are represented as types, and proofs are terms inhabiting those types. Users often construct proofs through tactics, which transform a proof state until all goals are closed [12,42]. Lean’s large mathematical library, mathlib ,provides reusable definitions and lemmas, making premise retrieval and library search central to nontrivial automated proof generation.   

> 1theorem symmetry_example (a b : Nat) (h : a = b) : b = a := by
> 2exact h.symm

Listing 2.2: A minimal Lean proof using a local hypothesis. The theorem assumes h : a = 

23 b and proves the reversed equality b = a by applying the symmetry operation h.symm .Before the proof is completed, the proof state contains the variables a and b, the hypothesis 

h : a = b , and the goal b = a . The tactic exact h.symm supplies a term whose type matches the goal, using symmetry of equality. Lean elaborates the tactic proof into an underlying proof term, which is then checked by the kernel. This illustrates the interaction surface used by LLM theorem provers: observe a proof state, generate a tactic or proof term, and use the checker to determine whether the proof has progressed. Therefore, Lean places a different burden on LLMs than Dafny. Rather than mostly generating solver-guiding annotations around executable code, the model must often search through tactics, select lemmas, manage local context, and construct explicit proofs. This makes Lean a natural setting for studying proof-state representation, retrieval, decomposition, and verifier-guided search. 

# Other Verification Languages 

Verus and F* provide useful comparison points for Dafny [14,15]. Verus is a Rust-based verifier for proving functional correctness of low-level systems code against user-provided specifications; its specifications include preconditions, postconditions, assertions, and loop invariants, and these specifications are ghost code that does not appear in the compiled executable. F* is a proof-oriented programming language that combines dependent types, SMT-based automation, and tactic-based interactive theorem proving. Both systems appear in later LLM work because they share Dafny’s code-plus-specification structure while exposing different proof languages and implementation settings. Coq and Isabelle provide comparison points for Lean [11,43]. Like Lean, they support machine-checked proofs over large formal libraries, and much early neural theorem-proving work was developed in these ecosystems. Coq emphasizes tactic scripts and proof terms, while Isabelle/HOL combines structured proofs with powerful automation such as Sledgehammer. They are less central to this thesis than Dafny and Lean, but they motivate recurring 24 techniques in the next section: tactic prediction, premise retrieval, proof repair, and proof-assistant interaction. 

# 2.2 Automated Formal Methods 

This section reviews automated formal methods that use learned models. Section 2.2.1 covers neural theorem proving, where the formal statement is usually fixed and the model searches for a proof. Section 2.2.2 turns to vericoding, where the model must coordinate code, specification, and proof. Section 2.2.3 covers autoformalization and specification inference, which generate the formal statements and annotations that make verifier-grounded training possible. 

# 2.2.1 Neural Theorem Proving on Mathematics 

Interactive theorem provers (ITPs) such as Lean, Isabelle, Coq, and Metamath allow mathe-maticians to encode definitions, statements, and proofs as machine-checkable artifacts. A proof in this setting is a sequence of tactic (instructional) steps to reach the goal proved state, accepted once the proof is correctly type checked and the goal state is closed; large libraries such as Lean’s mathlib accumulate the lemmas and definitions on which many proofs build. 

Neural theorem proving (NTP) applies learned models to this environment in an attempt to automate theorem proving, ranging from early tactic predictors to more recent large language models trained on entire proof corpora and reinforced against verifier reward. This setting is unusually amenable to learned search policies: proof states are explicit, verifier feedback is exact, and mature libraries provide large corpora of reusable lemmas and tactics. 

Tactic prediction and search. The basic NTP template predates transformer models and has two components: a learned tactic policy and a search procedure. TacticToe demonstrated the approach on HOL4 by combining hand-engineered tactic features with depth-bounded 25 search [44]; ASTactic paired the CoqGym corpus with a recurrent decoder that emits tactic invocations as abstract syntax trees [45]; and Tactician’s k-nearest-neighbor tactic recommender, combined with CoqHammer’s premise (fact) selection and dispatch tool to other automated theorem provers (ATPs), proved 56.7% of Coq’s standard library [46]. Subsequent work has scaled this template rather than replaced it, preserving the basic policy-plus-search shape. 

Transformer policies and self-training. The arrival of large transformer models scaled the policy side of the template first. GPT-f trained a decoder-only language model on 

(tactic-state, tactic) pairs, implementing a “most-likely"-first proof search, and iter-atively retrained on its own verified proofs, pushing Metamath set.mm to roughly 57% versus the previous 21 % SOTA performance [47]. Han et al. [48] proposed co-training on self-supervised data extracted from kernel-level proof terms alongside the usual tactic prediction objective, raising theorem proving success rate on a held-out mathlib suite from 32% to 48%. The gains come from proof terms recording the elaborated proof structure (i.e., resolved implicits, inferred types, and kernel-verified subproofs) that human tactic scripts do not surface. Polu et al. [49] formalized the self-training half of the loop as expert iteration over a problem curriculum : auto-generate intermediate problems at calibrated difficulty, attempt them with the current model, replay successes into the supervised pool, and retrain. Search then emerged as a separable axis with HyperTree Proof Search, a Monte Carlo Tree Search style AND/OR-tree algorithm whose policy and critic update online from each newly discovered proof, lifting Metamath from 65.4% to 82.6% [50] and showed that Monte-Carlo-style search and expert iteration are complementary approaches. 

Retrieval and Lean benchmarks. Around this supervised core, the modern Lean stack consolidated. LeanDojo extracted programmatic interaction traces and a 98k-theorem 

mathlib benchmark, and its companion ReProver was the first Lean prover to retrieve premises densely from mathlib before generating a tactic [51]; premise retrieval has been a 26 structural primitive of academic Lean provers since. miniF2F established the complementary competition-level evaluation target: 488 problems drawn from the AIME, AMC, and IMO, formalized across Lean, Metamath, and Isabelle, providing a unified cross-system leaderboard against which nearly all subsequent provers are measured [52].Math-focused pretraining also sharpened the base on which downstream fine-tuned models operate: Llemma continued-pretrained 7B and 34B models on Proof-Pile-2, lifting formal-to-formal miniF2F pass rates from 20.5% to 26.2% (7B) and 22.2% to 25.8% (34B) over the Code Llama baselines without any proof-specific fine-tuning [53]. Process supervision also emerged through approaches such as Lean-STaR, which interleaved informal “thoughts” between tactics, ran the resulting tactics through Lean, and fine-tuned only on (thought, tactic) pairs whose proofs verified [54], which reappears at scale in Kimina-Prover and in the current generation of LLM-based provers. 

Verifier-reward training and test-time search. The DeepSeek-Prover line brings these ingredients together in a modern NTP pipeline: synthetic formal data, verifier-filtered self-training, reinforcement learning from proof-assistant feedback, and test-time search. DeepSeek-Prover V1 trained a 7B prover on synthetic Lean proofs; V1.5 added GRPO-style verifier rewards and an MCTS-like search procedure; and V2 further emphasized subgoal decomposition and large-scale reasoning traces. Taken together, these systems show that recent gains in NTP come less from next-token tactic prediction alone than from the interaction between data generation, verifier feedback, and search [32,36,55]. Recent provers continue to explore different points in this design space. Goedel-Prover-V2 combines scaffolded data synthesis, verifier-guided self-correction, and model averaging, achieving strong miniF2F performance with relatively small 8B and 32B models [33,56]. Kimina-Prover applies large-scale RL to a Qwen2.5-72B base model using Lean-STaR-style interleaved reasoning traces [57]. Seed-Prover emphasizes lemma-style whole-proof reasoning and test-time compute allocation by problem difficulty, while AlphaProof uses a different 27 AlphaZero-style recipe: autoformalize informal problems into Lean, train through verified proof search, and update the policy online at competition time [30,34]. Across these systems, the common lesson is that frontier NTP systems are increasingly built around verifier-grounded data generation, decomposition, and search-time scaling rather than static supervised learning alone. Agentic scaffolds built on top of these specialist provers, including DSP, COPRA, LEGO-Prover, Apollo, and Hilbert, are discussed later in Part II .

Limits of math-only NTP. Two empirical findings do slightly undermine these headline results. First, autoformalization errors can dominate end-to-end performance: Ospanov, Farnia, and Yousefzadeh [58] show that combining a high-accuracy autoformalizer with a strong prover can still yield much lower full-pipeline accuracy when the formalized statement drifts from the informal problem. Second, benchmark transfer remains limited: Poiroux, Bosselut, and Kuncak [59] evaluate provers on research-level Lean Blueprint theorems and find substantially lower success than on curated competition benchmarks. Math NTP is therefore a powerful demonstration of verifier-reward learning, but it is also a comparatively clean setting. The statement is fixed, the artifact being generated is usually only the proof, mature libraries provide retrievable lemmas, and the proof assistant supplies exact feedback on candidate proof steps. The vericoding setting in Section 2.2.2 relaxes these assumptions: the model must synthesize code and specifications alongside the proof, and verifier success can be confounded by weak specifications or incorrect implementations. 

# 2.2.2 LLMs for Vericoding 

Where ordinary code generation asks a model to produce executable code, and theorem proving often asks it to complete a proof for a fixed formal statement, vericoding asks the model to align three coupled artifacts: code, specification, and proof. The central challenge is that each artifact can fail independently: code may compile but violate intent, a specification may verify while being vacuous, and a proof may fail despite nearly correct code 28 and specifications. Recent benchmarks show that this alignment problem remains difficult even for frontier models. On VERINA, a Lean 4 benchmark of 189 verified-programming tasks, OpenAI’s o3 reaches 72.6% code correctness, 52.3% specification correctness, and only 4.9% end-to-end proof success [60]. CLEVER reports the same shape: frontier models routinely produce code that compiles, yet none achieves end-to-end Lean verification at meaningful rates [61]. The 12,504-specification cross-language Vericoding benchmark of sharpens the asymmetry across systems: off-the-shelf LLMs verify 82% of Dafny tasks, 44% of Verus/Rust tasks, and 27% of Lean tasks [37]. These results suggest that the main obstacle is not merely syntactic familiarity with a verification language, but the proof burden imposed by each environment and the feedback structure available to the model. Existing LLM approaches to vericoding can be organized along three axes: the feedback signal, the artifact being revised, and the supervision regime. Feedback ranges from raw verifier errors, to retrieved examples, to synthesized counterexamples, to dense proof-progress or verifier-reward signals. The revised artifact may be the implementation, the formal specification, proof annotations, helper assertions, tactic scripts, or an explicit decomposition of the proof obligation. Finally, supervision ranges from prompt scaffolding and retrieval, to fine-tuning on verifier-filtered data, to reinforcement learning against proof-checker feedback. This section follows those axes rather than reintroducing the verification systems themselves. 

Prompting, retrieval, and scaffolded generation. Early work on Dafny established the basic prompt-and-repair shape of LLM-assisted verified programming. Loughridge et al. [62] introduced DafnyBench, a 750-program corpus of structured problems. With retry-on-error feedback, the strongest baseline reached 68% pass rate but degraded sharply with program length. Misu et al. [63] studied method synthesis over 178 MBPP problems translated into Dafny, establishing a retrieval-augmented and chain-of-thought prompting taxonomy. Laurel [64] pushed this scaffolding further by parsing verifier errors to insert assertion placeholders 29 at failing locations and retrieving examples using a proof-similarity metric, generating 56.6% of missing assertions on DafnyGym. Clover [65] added a tri-consistency check between code, formal annotations, and natural-language docstrings, showing that verified-code benchmarks can be gamed by under-specification unless specification strength is checked explicitly. Retrieval has also become central outside Dafny. In F*, Chakraborty et al. [66] curated a large real-code corpus of 940,000 lines and 54,000 top-level definitions from production Windows, Linux, Python, and Firefox proofs, then used retrieval over in-corpus proofs to condition small open models such as Phi-2 and StarCoder. PoPilot [67] extends this F* direction by combining synthetic basic-problem augmentation with project-level repair traces, fine-tuning a repair-specialized model on edit sequences developers produce when fixing broken proofs. Jain et al. [68] instead studies source-code telemetry from F* and Verus developers, using process data to derive prompt and interaction policies for proof agents. In Coq, Rango [69] retrieves both relevant premises and similar in-project proofs during proof search, reaching 32.0% on CoqStoq and improving substantially over prior baselines. Across these systems, retrieval gives the model access to local proof idioms and project-specific lemmas that are unlikely to be recoverable from pretraining alone. 

Verifier-guided repair and counterexample feedback. A second line of work treats the verifier as an interactive critic rather than a final judge. AutoVerus [70] introduced a three-phase workflow for Verus: preliminary proof generation, tip-guided refinement, and error-message-driven debugging. SAFE [71] extends this template with self-evolving supervised fine-tuning, where verifier-filtered outputs become training data and incorrect attempts are repurposed as self-debugging traces. VeriStruct [72] scales agentic refinement from individual functions to data-structure modules by planning abstractions, type invariants, specifications, and proof code before applying syntax-aware repair, verifying 128 of 129 functions and 10 of 11 modules. ExVerus [73] replaces raw verifier-error repair with synthesized source-level SMT queries whose satisfying models act as concrete counterexamples, helping the model 30 add invariants that rule out real failing executions rather than merely reacting to low-level solver output. Similar repair patterns appear in theorem-proving settings. PALM [74] observes that LLMs often produce plausible high-level Coq proof structure but fail on low-level details, motivating a generate-then-repair pipeline that drafts whole proofs and then discharges failing subgoals using Sledgehammer, CoqHammer, and deterministic backtracking. These systems suggest that verifier feedback is most useful when it is transformed into a model-readable intermediate signal: a placeholder location, a counterexample, a retrieved proof, a smaller subgoal, or a structured repair trace. 

Fine-tuning and verifier-filtered supervision. Prompting and retrieval improve inference-time behavior, but they do not by themselves adapt the model distribution to verification tasks. Several systems therefore build verifier-filtered training loops. PoPilot [67] augments F* supervision with synthetic basic problems and project-level repair traces. SAFE [71] applies a similar idea in Verus by recycling successful verifier-filtered outputs into later supervised fine-tuning rounds and using failed attempts as self-debugging data. For Dafny, DafnyBench [62], DafnyGym [64], and related hint-removal datasets provide natural supervision targets: missing assertions, loop invariants, proof hints, and specification annotations. This line of work is especially relevant to Dafny because the model can often succeed by generating compact annotations that guide the SMT backend, rather than producing a full proof script. 

RL and proof decomposition with verifier rewards. More recent work moves from supervised repair traces toward reinforcement learning with verifier-derived rewards. Goedel-Code-Prover [75] is the clearest example in Lean verified programming: it recursively decom-poses a top-level verification theorem into subgoals, scores candidate decompositions with a progress metric, and trains an 8B model first by supervised fine-tuning on decomposition-and-completion trajectories and then by GRPO with online Lean 4 verifier rewards. Its results across VERINA, CLEVER, and AlgoVeri suggest that decomposition and dense verifier 31 feedback can make proof search more learnable than direct whole-proof generation. This direction is important because it treats the verifier not only as a filter, but as a reward source. In Dafny and Verus, analogous rewards may come from partial verification, fewer remaining obligations, successful invariant preservation, or reduced counterexample space. In Lean, rewards may come from proof-state progress, subgoal closure, or successful elaboration of intermediate tactic steps. The common theme is that formal verification supplies unusually clean correctness signals, but only if the harness can expose them at the right granularity. 

Verifier interfaces and proof-search infrastructure. A final line of work studies the infrastructure needed to expose proof assistants as usable environments for LLM training and search. LeanDojo provides an open Lean environment with data extraction, programmatic interaction, premise annotations, benchmarks, and ReProver, addressing the reproducibility barriers created by private datasets and large closed training pipelines [51]. Pantograph similarly frames Lean interaction as a machine-to-machine interface, exposing proof execution, environment access, data extraction, and search hooks for methods such as Monte Carlo Tree Search [76]. These systems suggest that LLM-based formal verification is not only a modeling problem: the verifier must be wrapped in an interface that exposes proof states, local context, retrievable premises, verifier errors, and partial progress at the right granularity. This motivates the Lean harness component of this thesis. 

Open failure modes. Across these approaches, three failure modes recur. First, models can reward-hack the verifier by producing weak or vacuous specifications that make verification easy without capturing the intended behavior, a problem made explicit by Clover’s tri-consistency framing [65]. Second, single-shot generation remains brittle: published ablations across DafnyBench, Laurel, AutoVerus, SAFE, PALM, and Goedel-Code-Prover show that iterative refinement, repair, retrieval, or decomposition outperforms one-pass generation, especially as tasks become longer or require multiple annotations [62,64,70,71,74,75]. Third, 32 multi-artifact repair compounds errors: a system that can fill one missing assertion may still fail when code, specification, and proof must be revised jointly. These failures motivate the two directions studied in this thesis: improving LLM performance on Dafny through verifier-aware training, and building Lean harnesses that expose proof-state feedback, decomposition, and verifier rewards at the right granularity. 

# 2.2.3 Autoformalization and Spec Inference 

Autoformalization translates informal intent into a formal artifact that a verifier can check. In mathematics, this means translating natural-language theorem statements or proof sketches into Lean, Isabelle, or related proof-assistant languages. In software verification, it means inferring preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants, helper assertions, or contracts from docstrings, tests, natural-language specifications, or code. Both settings follow the same propose-and-check loop: an LLM proposes a formal candidate, and a sound checker filters or scores it. The difference is semantic risk: mathematical autoformalization must preserve the meaning of an informal theorem, while software spec inference must avoid weak or vacuous specifications that verify without capturing intended program behavior. Two threads are especially relevant to this thesis. The first is mathematical autofor-malization , which translates natural-language theorem statements and proofs into formal proof-assistant languages such as Lean or Isabelle. The second is software specification inference , which translates natural-language descriptions, tests, or code into preconditions, postconditions, invariants, and proof helpers for systems such as Dafny, Verus, Frama-C, or Boogie. Both threads follow the same high-level loop: an LLM proposes a formal candidate, and a sound checker filters or scores it. Their main difference is the target of formalization. Math autoformalization usually formalizes the statement to be proved; software spec inference must formalize the intended behavior of executable code, where weak or vacuous specifications can pass the verifier while failing to capture the intended program semantics. 33 Math autoformalization 

Early work established that LLMs could perform nontrivial mathematical autoformalization at all. Wu et al. [77] showed that few-shot-prompted models could translate competition-style problems into Isabelle/HOL, and that autoformalized statements could improve a downstream prover. This work introduced the core template reused throughout verifier-grounded learning: generate formal candidates from informal artifacts, then use a checker to convert noisy model outputs into training or evaluation signal. Subsequent work expanded the unit of formalization from statements to proof structure. Draft-Sketch-Prove [78] first drafts an informal proof, then converts it into an Isabelle/Isar skeleton with sorry placeholders, and finally uses Sledgehammer to close the holes. The result suggests that LLMs are often better at producing high-level proof plans than complete low-level formal proofs. Zhou et al. [79] invert the role of autoformalization: instead of using it only to translate problems, they use it to verify natural-language solutions by autoformalizing candidate reasoning into Isabelle, checking consistency with the formalized problem, and aggregating only the surviving candidates. At larger scale, AlphaProof uses autoformalization as a data-generation engine: informal mathematical problems are translated into Lean 4 and filtered to produce large formal training corpora for an AlphaZero-style prover [30]. Open datasets such as Lean Workbook [80] and ProofNet [81] provide smaller-scale anchors for this pipeline. The important point for this thesis is not only that autoformalization can produce formal data, but that checker-filtered formal data can become a training substrate for downstream proving. However, headline autoformalization results can overstate end-to-end reliability. Ospanov, Farnia, and Yousefzadeh [58] audit miniF2F-Lean and find systematic discrepancies between informal and formal statements, showing that syntactic validity and prover success are not sufficient: the formal statement must also preserve the intended informal meaning. Distribution shift sharpens this concern. RLMEval evaluates proof autoformalization and neural theorem proving on research-level Lean Blueprint theorems, where models perform far 34 worse than on curated competition benchmarks [59]. Semantic equivalence is itself difficult to judge: ReForm’s ConsistencyCheck reports substantial semantic-error rates even among human experts, and improves autoformalization by explicitly training against consistency checks [82]. Tool-feedback systems such as Autoformalizer-with-Tool-Feedback [83] have made syntactic invalidity less central; the harder residual failures are semantic drift, vacuous or over-strong statements, and hallucinated helper lemmas. 

Software spec inference 

The same propose-and-check pattern transfers to software, but the formal artifact changes. Instead of translating a theorem statement, the model must infer contracts, invariants, assertions, and proof helpers that capture the intended behavior of code. The checker may be Boogie/Z3, Frama-C with its WP plugin, the Dafny verifier, or another deductive verification backend. This setting is closer to the thesis target because the formal artifact is not independent of the implementation: changing the specification, annotation, or helper proof can change what the verifier accepts. Loopy [84] instantiates this pattern for loop invariants in C/Boogie programs, with LLM-generated candidates accepted or rejected by Boogie and Z3. SpecGen [85] extends specification inference to Java by generating JML preconditions, postconditions, and class invariants, then applying mutation operators such as precondition weakening to reduce vacuity. AutoSpec [86] targets C programs using static-analysis-driven decomposition and iterative Frama-C feedback, including on a real-world X.509 parser. These systems mirror math autoformalization methodologically, but their failure modes are more software-specific: inferred specifications may be too weak, invariants may fail to support later proof steps, and local annotations may interact in non-obvious ways. Spec inference for Dafny is especially relevant to this thesis because Dafny sits between ordinary programming and interactive theorem proving: the user writes executable code plus annotations, while the SMT-backed verifier discharges many proof obligations automatically. 35 Faria et al. [87] report a multi-model pipeline that generates preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants, auxiliary predicates, and proof helpers from code annotated with natural-language specifications and tests. Their analysis identifies proof-helper annotations as a disproportionate source of remaining difficulty. DAISY [88] makes the same bottleneck more explicit: a hybrid LLM and error-message heuristic works substantially better when only one helper assertion is missing than when multiple helpers must be inferred simultaneously. This connects directly to the failure modes identified in vericoding. Systems such as Clover [65] and SAFE [71] treat natural-language specifications, formal annotations, code, and verifier feedback as parts of a larger consistency loop. Their role here is not just to generate code, but to guard against the central risk of specification inference: a candidate may verify for the wrong reason. This is the software analogue of semantic drift in math autoformalization, but with an additional reward-hacking failure mode: a model can make verification easier by weakening the specification rather than by producing a better proof. The two threads therefore sit at different maturity levels. Math autoformalization has canonical benchmarks such as miniF2F, ProofNet, and ConsistencyCheck, a clean checker-filtered formulation, and industrial-scale demonstrations. Its main open problems are semantic-equivalence judgment and distribution shift to research-level mathematics. Software spec inference is more fragmented: Loopy, SpecGen, AutoSpec, Dafny-specific pipelines, and DAISY evaluate on different languages, checkers, and curated benchmarks, making cross-system comparison difficult. For this thesis, the central lesson is that verifier feedback is essential but too coarse on its own. It can certify that a candidate specification or helper annotation checks, but it does not always reveal whether the specification captures the intended behavior or which missing helper caused a multi-step proof to fail. 36 Chapter 3 Benchmarks 

This chapter describes the evaluation suite used in the thesis. The thesis uses two comple-mentary benchmarks. The Vericoding Benchmark evaluates standardized formally verified program synthesis tasks across Dafny, Verus/Rust, and Lean. Dalek Bench, constructed in this thesis from the curve25519-dalek-lean-verify repository, evaluates proof completion and repair in a repository-grounded Lean setting. The distinction between these benchmarks is important. The Vericoding Benchmark measures broad cross-language capability on self-contained formal specification tasks, while Dalek Bench measures whether a model can operate inside an existing Lean verification project, where success depends on repository context, imported definitions, domain-specific lemmas, and the ability to repair incomplete proofs without changing the trusted specification. 

# Benchmark Overview 

Table 3.1 groups related benchmarks by evaluation setting. Math-focused benchmarks test formal theorem proving and autoformalization. Dafny benchmarks emphasize localized verifier repair and annotation synthesis. Vericoding benchmarks move toward end-to-end generation of verified implementations and proofs. Dalek Bench extends this setting to repository-grounded Lean proof repair, where success depends on existing imports, definitions, 37 Benchmark Language(s) Task Thesis Role                           

> Math proving and autoformalization
> miniF2F Lean, Isabelle, Metamath, HOL Light Formal math proofs Standard NTP baseline ProofNet Lean Informal-to-formal math Autoformalization reference PutnamBench Lean, Isabelle, Coq Hard math proofs Reasoning stress test
> Verified-program repair
> DafnyBench Dafny Annotation completion Dafny repair baseline DafnyGym Dafny Assertion synthesis Local repair baseline
> End-to-end vericoding
> VERINA Lean Code/spec/proof generation Lean vericoding reference CLEVER Lean Verified code synthesis Curated Lean benchmark
> Vericoding Benchmark Dafny, Verus/Rust, Lean Code/proof synthesis Main broad benchmark
> Repository-grounded proof repair
> Dalek Bench Lean Proof completion/repair Main repo-context benchmark

Table 3.1: Selected benchmarks grouped by evaluation setting. Math-focused benchmarks test formal theorem proving and autoformalization; Dafny benchmarks emphasize localized verifier repair and annotation synthesis; vericoding benchmarks evaluate end-to-end generation of verified code and proofs. The two thesis benchmarks are shown in bold: the Vericoding Benchmark provides broad cross-language coverage, while Dalek Bench evaluates repository-grounded Lean proof completion and repair. [37,52,60–62,81,89–91] lemmas, and project structure. 

# 3.1 Vericoding Benchmark 

We use vericoding to refer to the generation and repair of machine-checkable verified software artifacts, including formal specifications, executable definitions or implementations, and proofs connecting the implementation to the specification. In the Vericoding Benchmark [37](See Table 3.2, the central task is more constrained: given an initial specification specification and surrounding context, the model must generate the missing implementation, broken specifications, helper lemmas, or proof artifacts required for the target verifier to accept the completed file. The benchmark was designed to bridge code generation and neural theorem proving. Ordinary coding benchmarks such as HumanEval or MBPP evaluate executable synthesis, but correctness is approximated by finite test suites. Theorem-proving benchmarks provide machine-checkable success criteria, but typically target mathematical statements rather than 38 verified programs. Vericoding combines these requirements by testing whether a model can align implementation, specification, and proof under a formal checker. The benchmark also reflects a practical feature of formal verification: specifications are not always complete, consistent, or immediately compilable. Although the main experiments evaluate verifier-accepted completions from formal task contexts, the benchmark construction explicitly treats specification repair as part of the broader verification workflow. This matters because real verification rarely consists only of filling a proof hole under a perfect specification; it often requires identifying whether the specification, implementation, auxiliary definitions, or proof structure is responsible for a verification failure. The benchmark was constructed by curating source tasks from existing verification benchmarks, programming benchmarks, and mathematical library documentation, then normalizing them into a common vericoding format. For benchmark-derived tasks, implemen-tations, helper lemmas, and proofs were removed and replaced with holes. For programming and documentation sources, formal specifications were first produced by autoformalization. Cross-language coverage was expanded with an LLM-based specification translator: given a source-language specification and a target verification language, the translator generated a candidate target-language specification, checked it with the target verifier, and iteratively repaired it using verifier feedback. The resulting files were organized with explicit vc-* 

section tags, such as vc-preamble , vc-spec , vc-code , vc-helpers , and vc-postamble , and were then parsed into benchmark metadata, compiled, and quality-checked. The benchmark remains broad rather than repository-specific. Its small and self-contained tasks support controlled comparison, but they do not fully capture the long-context, library-dependent reasoning required in real verified software. 

# DafnyBench Re-evaluation and Model Progress 

A contribution of this thesis was the re-evaluation of DafnyBench under newer frontier models as part of the Vericoding Benchmark study [37]. DafnyBench is a useful longitudinal 39 Source Ref Dafny Verus/Rust Lean Total                                                  

> APPS (Test) A677 536 676 1889 DafnyBench D443 440 440 1323 NumPyTriple T603 581 603 1787 VerifiedCogen J172 172 172 516 VERINA V157 156 189 502 BigNum B62 62 62 186 NumPySimple S58 58 59 175 HumanEval H162 161 161 †484 FVAPPS F––4006 4006
> Total 2334 2166 6368 10868

Table 3.2: Composition of the Vericoding Benchmark evaluation subset by source dataset and target language. Counts report the retained tasks used in experiments after compilation, formatting, and quality checks. The full generated release contains 12,504 formal specifica-tions; the retained experimental subset contains 10,868 tasks. † The Lean HumanEval row corresponds to the CLEVER benchmark subset. baseline within Vericoding because it evaluates localized Dafny verification: models are given Dafny programs with missing proof hints, assertions, or invariants, and must restore enough annotations for the verifier to accept the program while preserving the intended specification [62]. The re-evaluation was run as an API-based experiment over frontier models available at the time of evaluation, accessed through OpenRouter as a common model interface. This allowed the same prompting, parsing, verifier invocation, and repair loop to be applied across models from different providers. The experiment retained the original DafnyBench prompts and evaluation criteria, but updated the infrastructure for newer reasoning-heavy models. Thus, the comparison only measures model progress under rather than gains from a new benchmark format or task construction. The original DafnyBench study reported a best success rate of approximately 68% 

[62]. Under the Vericoding Benchmark re-evaluation, the strongest single model reached approximately 89% , while the union over evaluated models reached approximately 96% [37]. These results indicate rapid progress on localized SMT-guided verification repair. 40 The result is important but also limited. It shows that frontier models have substantially improved at localized Dafny proof repair, especially the generation of assertions, invariants, and auxiliary proof hints. However, DafnyBench does not fully test cross-language vericod-ing, specification repair, or repository-grounded proof construction. It therefore motivates grounding in the broader Vericoding Benchmark. 

# Initial LLM Performance and Subset Selection 

The initial Vericoding Benchmark results provide an empirical basis for selecting subsets for further study (See Table 3.3. In the benchmark evaluation, off-the-shelf frontier LLMs were prompted to fill tagged code and proof holes, with verifier errors returned for a fixed number of repair iterations. At the language level, model-union success was highest on Dafny with 82 .2% , followed by Verus/Rust and Lean with 44 .3% and 26 .8% respectively [37]. This difference stems from the high degree of automation inherent in SMT-backed verifiers, in contrast to interactive theorem provers such as Lean that rely on explicit, user-guided tactic sequences to construct formal proofs. The gap supports using Dafny as a tractable post-training setting for smaller models, where SMT-backed verifier feedback provides an automatic training signal, while using Lean subsets to study inference-time scaffolding for harder explicit proof construction. These results motivate different experimental roles for Dafny and Lean. For Dafny, APPStest is a useful post-training target because it has the largest Dafny subset size among the selected candidates and retains nontrivial headroom: the model union solves 83 .0% ,compared with 93 .2% on HumanEval and 95 .9% on Dafny VerifiedCogen. Thus APPStest is high-performing enough to provide a dense verifier-feedback signal, but not so saturated that improvements become difficult to measure. The Lean subsets are chosen to make scaffold iteration measurable. A useful scaffold baseline should leave room for improvement over one-shot generation while still producing enough partially successful attempts and verifier diagnostics to guide development. VERINA 41 Setting Lang. Tasks Best Model Best Success Model Union                                              

> Language-level baselines
> Overall Dafny 2161 Claude Opus 4.1 67 .5% 82 .2%
> Overall Verus/Rust 2166 GPT-5 30 .9% 44 .3%
> Overall Lean 2361 GPT-5 17 .9% 26 .8%
> Dafny subsets
> APPStest Dafny 677 GPT-5-mini 71 .6% 83 .0%
> HumanEval Dafny 162 Claude Sonnet 4 72 .8% 93 .2%
> VerifiedCogen Dafny 172 Claude Opus 4.1 90 .7% 95 .9%
> Lean subsets
> VERINA Lean 189 Claude Opus 4.1 15 .3% 25 .4%
> VerifiedCogen Lean 172 GPT-5 34 .9% 44 .2%
> BigNum Lean 62 GPT-5 12 .9% 12 .9%

Table 3.3: Initial Vericoding Benchmark performance used to guide subset selection [37]. “Best Success” reports the strongest single-model result for each setting, while “Model Union” reports the fraction of tasks solved by at least one evaluated model. The results show a large gap between Dafny and Lean performance, motivating Dafny as a tractable post-training setting for smaller models and Lean as a target for inference-time proof scaffolding. provides comparability with prior Lean vericoding work, since it consists of curated veri-fied algorithmic and data-structure tasks. Lean VerifiedCogen provides a more tractable improvement target: its 44 .2% model-union success rate shows that current models can solve many instances, while still leaving substantial headroom for gains. BigNum provides a harder stress test, with only 12 .9% model-union success and a focus on arithmetic-heavy, cryptography-adjacent reasoning. It is therefore useful for probing whether scaffolds help on longer and more brittle proof obligations, but should not be treated as a standalone measure of general Lean performance. 

# 3.2 Dalek Bench 

Dalek Bench is a thesis-constructed Lean benchmark derived from the curve25519-dalek-lean-verify 

repository. The upstream project verifies parts of the Rust curve25519-dalek cryptography library by translating Rust implementations into Lean with Aeneas and proving Lean specifi-cations about the translated functions. Dalek Bench turns this repository-scale verification project into a collection of proof-completion and repair tasks for LLM-based proof assistants. 42 Unlike the Vericoding Benchmark, which aggregates many relatively small tasks across languages, Dalek Bench is built from a single realistic verification codebase. The benchmark therefore tests whether a model can operate against existing Lean definitions, generated names, local specifications, imported lemmas, and project proof conventions. This makes it a natural evaluation setting for the inference-time scaffolds studied in Part II. 

# Source Repository and Extraction Target 

The benchmark starts from the curve25519-dalek-lean-verify repository. The verified Rust baseline is the curve25519-dalek 4.2.0 release, and the Rust code is translated into Lean using Aeneas. The extracted Lean project contains executable definitions, generated from the Rust implementation, together with Lean specification modules that state and prove correctness properties of those definitions. The extraction is intentionally not a full blind translation of the Rust crate. It targets the core verification surface used by the project: backend support, field arithmetic, scalar arithmetic, Edwards-curve operations, Montgomery-form operations, Ristretto encodings, and related constants. Some Rust features that were outside the reliable Aeneas fragment, such as iterator-heavy or dynamically indexed paths, are excluded or rewritten before extraction. As a result, Dalek Bench focuses on the core arithmetic and curve-operation proofs that are present in the Lean verification project. 

# Helper-Scaffolded Benchmark Construction 

The initial Dalek Bench version used in this thesis is a helper-scaffolded worksheet bench-mark. Each task is centered on one top-level Rust-function correctness theorem. Instead of presenting only the main theorem, the benchmark also exposes selected proof-only supporting specification theorems as helper goals. This makes the proof decomposition explicit while still requiring all exposed helper goals to be proved by the solver. The construction proceeds in four stages. First, the extraction pass scans the Lean 43 verification files and records source-level declarations. Second, a compiler metadata pass stores declaration metadata and dependency information, including which dependencies occur in theorem statements and which occur only inside proofs. Third, a selection pass filters declarations into an auditable theorem pool, keeping substantive theorem and lemma declarations from the Curve25519-Dalek Lean project while discarding auxiliary declarations and declarations that depend on upstream sorry . Finally, an emission pass creates one small Lake project per benchmark task. Lake is Lean’s build system, so each emitted project packages the relevant Lean files, imports, toolchain, and dependencies needed to check the task. This lets the grader evaluate a submitted Task.lean file in a reproducible Lean environment matching the original repository context. 

# Task Format 

Each emitted task is a self-contained Lake project containing a vendored slice of the original verification repository, a visible Task.lean file, a reference solution.lean file for grading and analysis, and a meta.yaml file with target and dependency metadata. The solver edits the worksheet-style Task.lean file. The worksheet follows the same high-level sectioning convention as the Vericoding Bench-mark: vc-preamble , vc-helpers , vc-definitions , vc-theorems . The preamble im-ports the relevant specification module. The helper section contains copied helper theorem statements whose proof bodies have been removed and replaced with sorry . The definitions section is usually empty, since executable definitions are provided by the vendored project context. The theorem section contains the main target theorem, also with its proof removed. This format is deliberately scaffolded but not axiomatized. Helper statements are copied into the task under fresh names and must be proved by the submitted solution. The grader checks both the helper targets and the main target, and rejects solutions that depend on forbidden axioms or on the original redacted helper proofs. Thus, helper goals guide decomposition without weakening the verification requirement. 44 vc-preamble    

> imports Curve25519Dalek.Specs.Montgomery.ProjectivePoint.Identity
> vc-helpers
> helper theorem statements copied into the worksheet with proofs removed
> from_limbs_spec_helper
> limb constructor preserves field value
> ONE_spec_helper
> field constant equals 1
> ZERO_spec_helper
> field constant equals 0
> vc-definitions
> empty in this task; definitions are supplied by repository imports
> vc-theorems identity_spec_target
> target: prove that the function returns the Montgomery projective identity point

Figure 3.1: Concrete worksheet anatomy for an example Dalek Bench identity_spec task. The solver receives repository imports, three helper proof obligations, and the main target theorem. Helper goals expose proof structure but must themselves be proved; they are not hidden axioms. 

# Benchmark Analysis 

The helper-scaffolded Dalek Bench contains 190 main benchmark tasks and 4,933 copied helper goals, for 5,123 total proof obligations. Helper goals appear in 149 of the 190 tasks, while 41 tasks expose only the main target theorem. Across all tasks, the median helper count is 10 , and the largest task contains 179 helpers. This wide range makes the benchmark useful for evaluating both direct proof completion and larger decomposition-style proof worksheets. Figure 3.2 shows the aggregate helper-count distribution. Table 3.4 complements this by breaking the workload down by specification area. This distinction is useful: the figure shows the overall difficulty profile seen by an agent, while the table shows which parts of the cryptographic verification stack contribute the largest helper burden. Together, the distribution figure and area table characterize the benchmark at two levels. The distribution figure shows that Dalek Bench has a long-tailed helper structure, with many small tasks and a smaller number of large worksheet-style tasks. The area table shows that this burden is concentrated in specific proof families: Montgomery, Scalar, and 45 Figure 3.2: Distribution of helper goals per task in the helper-scaffolded Dalek Bench. The benchmark contains both direct proof-completion tasks with no helper goals and long-tail worksheet tasks with many helper obligations; the median task has 10 helpers, and the largest task has 179 .Ristretto contribute the most helper goals, while Field has relatively few tasks but high per-task helper counts. This structure makes aggregate pass rate insufficient on its own; later experiments should also report whether scaffold improvements concentrate in direct proofs, arithmetic-heavy obligations, or dependency-heavy worksheet tasks. 

# Role in the Thesis 

Dalek Bench complements the Vericoding Benchmark by moving from standardized, mostly self-contained vericoding tasks to repository-grounded Lean proof repair. Its helper-scaffolded format is especially useful for evaluating agentic systems: helper goals expose intermediate proof structure, the repository context creates a need for local-context retrieval and tool use, and the Lean checker provides a precise success signal. The benchmark therefore serves as the main repository-scale evaluation setting for the inference-time scaffolds introduced later in the thesis. 46 Spec area Tasks With helpers Helper goals Median helpers Montgomery 20 16 1,163 74                                     

> Scalar 35 27 968 33
> Ristretto 20 17 937 19
> Edwards 30 27 617 4.5
> Field 77404 50
> Backend scalar arithmetic 20 18 357 19
> Backend curve models 19 18 319 4
> Backend field arithmetic 20 15 163 2
> Constants 19 450
> Total 190 149 4,933 –

Table 3.4: Helper burden in the helper-scaffolded Dalek Bench, grouped by specification area. The table reports the number of tasks in each area, how many expose helper goals, the total number of helper goals contributed by that area, and the median helper count per task. These quantities summarize the worksheet load seen by an agent, rather than the upstream extraction-funnel counts. 47 48 Chapter 4 Part I: Post-Training 

# 4.1 Preliminaries: Reinforcement Learning Mechanics 

Why reinforcement learning for LLMs? Reinforcement learning for language models treats generation itself as the action space: given a prompt x, the model samples a token trajectory y = ( y1, . . . , y T ) autoregressively, with yt ∼ πθ(· | x, y <t ), which receives a scalar outcome reward r(x, y ), and updates πθ to assign higher probability to successful rollouts. This differs from supervised fine-tuning, whose objective is to imitate a fixed demonstration 

y⋆ by maximizing the likelihood of each reference token under ground truth completions: 

LSFT (θ) = −

> T

X

> t=1

log πθ(y⋆t | x, y ⋆<t ).

SFT therefore provides a dense token-level imitation signal: the model is rewarded for matching the demonstrated trajectory. RL instead optimizes a sequence-level objective of the form 

max  

> θ

Ey∼πθ (·| x)[r(x, y )] ,

where the reward depends on properties of the completed output rather than on agreement with ground truth tokens. This distinction is crucial for reasoning and code. Generated 49 rollouts may differ from the demonstration token-by-token while still producing the correct answer. Though more expensive, we fully maximize exploration space this way. RL with human feedback (RLHF) made this paradigm practical for instruction-following by replacing hand-written rewards with a learned reward model trained from human preferences [92], the brekathrough for ChatGPT. RL with verifiable rewards (RLVR) removes the learned reward model from the loop and instead scores each sampled trajectory with a deterministic checker, such as a unit test, answer verifier, theorem prover, or formal-verification toolchain (as done in this thesis) [93]. The resulting loop is especially powerful for reasoning domains: candidate solutions can be generated at scale, checked automatically, and recycled into policy-gradient updates, which has made RLVR a central ingredient in recent high-reasoning training recipes [94]. 

From PPO to GRPO. Diving deeper into the progression of RL algorithms for LLMs, a key part of the standard RL objective is augmenting the outcome reward with a penalty that keeps the learned policy close to a reference model ( πref ), usually the supervised fine-tuned policy: 

max  

> θ

Ex∼D , y ∼πθ (·| x)[r(x, y )] − βD KL (πθ(· | x)∥πref (· | x)) .

This regularization prevents the policy from moving too far from the language distribution learned during pretraining and supervised fine-tuning, while the reward term selects for task success [92]. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) became the default optimizer for this objective alongside RLHF [92,95]. Given a rollout y = ( y1, . . . , y T ), PPO computes a token-level ratio to compare the generation likelihood under the active policy ( πθ) against the historical policy (πold ) used to sample the rollout. 

ρt(θ) = πθ(yt | x, y <t )

πθold (yt | x, y <t ).

50 The objective function for PPO is 

LPPO (θ) = E

" TX

> t=1

min ( ρt(θ)At, clip ( ρt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) At)

#

,

where At is an advantage estimate, defined as the difference between the observed return and a value prediction ( At ≈ Rt − Vψ(x, y <t )). Intuitively, At measures whether the sampled continuation performed better or worse than expected under the current policy. Tokens lying on higher-than-expected trajectories receive positive advantage and are made more likely, while tokens on lower-than-expected trajectories receive negative advantage and are suppressed. Another key term is the clipping term, which prevents a single update from changing the policy too aggressively. For long reasoning, code, and proof trajectories, the main difficulty is estimating At. PPO typically trains a value model to predict future return from partial trajectories. However, in RLVR, verifier rewards are sparse, terminal, and often available only after an entire candidate has been generated. Predicting eventual verifier success from partial code or proof prefixes becomes difficult. Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) avoids this issue through bypassing a value (critic) model, comparing multiple rollouts for the same prompt [96]. For each prompt x, GRPO samples a group of K completions y1, . . . , y K ∼ πθold (· | x) and scores them with the task reward ri = r(x, y i). We then define a normalized group-relative advantage 

ˆAi = ri − μx

σx + ϵA

.

Where μx, σ x are the group reward mean and variance. This advantage replaces a value model-dependent one as done in PPO, yielding the clipped objective 

LGRPO (θ) = E

 1

K

> K

X

> i=1

1

|yi|

> |yi|

X

> t=1

min 



ρi,t (θ) ˆAi, clip ( ρi,t (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAi

 ,

51 clip( x, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) = min(max( x, 1 − ϵ), 1 + ϵ) .

In the verifier-reward setting, prompt groups naturally contrast verified and failed completions. The per-response averaging in GRPO keeps the magnitude of each sampled completion’s update roughly independent of its length, while the group-relative baseline removes the need for a learned critic. This makes GRPO a natural default for RLVR pipelines [94]. 

DAPO-style refinements. Decoupled Clip and Dynamic Sampling Policy Optimization (DAPO), introduced by Yu et al. [97], was proposed as a practical refinement of GRPO for reproducing R1-style long-CoT reinforcement learning at open-source scale. Its motivation is that the basic group-relative objective is simple and critic-free, but brittle in the regime that matters for reasoning: rewards are sparse, successful rollouts are rare early in training, many prompt groups contain only successes or only failures, and long generations interact badly with both loss normalization and truncation. DAPO addresses these issues with four modifications. 1. Dynamic sampling. Prompt groups whose rollouts all receive the same reward provide no relative training signal. DAPO therefore only keeps groups with nonzero reward variance, i.e. Var ({r(x, y i)}Ki=1 ) > 0. For binary verifier rewards, this means keeping prompts where some but not all sampled completions verify (Note V is our verifier and 

Assemble “assembles" our proof given the LLM response) : 

0 < 1

K

> K

X

> i=1

1[V(Assemble( x, y i)) = verified ] < 1.

2. Token-level policy-gradient loss. The sequence-level GRPO objective averages each completion’s token losses as 1

> K

P

> i

(1 /|yi|) P 

> t

ℓi,t , giving each completion equal weight re-gardless of length. DAPO instead averages over all generated tokens, (1 / P 

> i

|yi|) P

> i

P 

> t

ℓi,t ,so long reasoning trajectories are not systematically down-weighted. 52 3. Asymmetric clipping. Clip-Higher replaces the symmetric PPO clipping interval with 

clip (ρ, 1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh ), where ϵhigh > ϵ low . This allows rare high-reward trajectories to be reinforced more strongly while still well-bounding destructive policy updates. 4. Overlong reward shaping. DAPO treats truncation as a distinct failure mode by penalizing generations that exceed a soft length threshold, for example with 

rlen (x, y ) = −λlen max (0 , (|y| − Lsoft )/(Lhard − Lsoft )) . This prevents overlong or trun-cated completions from being conflated with ordinary verifier failures. 

Dafny verifier rewards and success metrics. We instantiate this RLVR setup with Dafny. A prompt x ∼ D contains a Dafny task, including some combination of a natural-language description, method signature, formal contract, and partial implementation. The model samples a completion y ∼ πθ(· | x), which is inserted into the surrounding template to produce a candidate Dafny artifact a = Assemble (x, y ) The Dafny verifier is then a deterministic terminal evaluator with the following outcomes: 

VDafny (a) ∈



parse_error ,

compile_error ,

verification_error ,

timeout ,

verified 



The simplest verifier reward is therefore the binary outcome 

rraw (x, y ) = 1[VDafny (Assemble( x, y )) = verified ].

This is the source of Dafny’s appeal as an RLVR environment: the reward is machine-checkable, deterministic under a fixed verifier configuration, and does not require human preference labels or a learned reward model. 53 However, Dafny verification proves correctness only relative to the contracts and assump-tions present in the candidate artifact. A file that verifies satisfies the specification it presents to Dafny, 

VDafny (a) = verified ⇒ a |= φgiven ,

but this does not imply that the given specification φgiven matches the intended task specifica-tion φintended . In particular, a model may obtain verifier success by weakening postconditions, strengthening preconditions, introducing trusted assumptions, or otherwise changing the task being verified, failure modes also emphasized in prior Dafny benchmarks and training work [98,99]. We therefore distinguish raw verifier success from stricter task success throughout the experiments. We define strict success as raw verifier success plus two additional filters: the completion must preserve the intended specification and avoid forbidden verifier escape hatches. Hack rate is the fraction of raw verifier passes that fail this stricter criterion: 

StrictSuccess( x, y ) = RawPass( x, y ) ∧ SpecPreserved( x, y ) ∧ NoForbiddenConstructs( y)HackRate( x, y ) = Pr[StrictSuccess( x, y ) = 0 | RawPass( x, y ) = 1] .

Here, SpecPreserved checks that protected parts of the task are unchanged: method signatures, types, requires clauses, ensures clauses, and provided termination or fram-ing annotations. For example, changing ensures sorted(a) to ensures true or adding 

requires a.Length == 0 fails this check. NoForbiddenConstructs filters Dafny escape hatches such as assume false , unconstrained assume statements, and {:verify false} 

annotations. A completion that verifies only by weakening the contract or disabling the proof obligation is therefore counted as a raw pass but not as a strict success. 54 Figure 4.1: Single-turn Dafny RLVR training and validation pipeline. Training uses grouped rollouts, sampling K = 8 completions per prompt before extracting Dafny code and evaluating each completion with build / verify . Verifier outcomes are mapped to a staged reward and used for the DAPO update. Validation reuses the same extraction and verifier-based scoring pipeline with K = 1 , reporting staged reward on the held-out split. 

# 4.2 Setup: Models, Data, Infrastructure, Evaluation 

This section describes the initial single-turn Dafny RLVR setup, visualized in Fig. 4.1. The goal of this experiment was to test whether a language model could be trained directly from Dafny verifier feedback using the GRPO/DAPO-style objective introduced above. 

Model. The actor policy was initialized from Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct . We selected a 7B-parameter backbone to keep rollout-based RLVR tractable under the available compute budget. In this setting, training cost is dominated not only by policy optimization, but also by sampling long responses, generating multiple completions per prompt for group-relative advantage estimation, and executing the verifier on each sampled artifact. These costs made substantially larger actor models impractical for our experimental setup, which had access to at most roughly eight GPUs. We trained using the verl reinforcement-learning framework with the GRPO advantage estimator and the DAPO reward manager [100]. Each prompt produced K = 8 sampled completions per rollout batch, matching the group-relative setup from Section 4.1. The maximum prompt length was 2048 tokens and the maximum response length was 8192 tokens (See Table 4.2. 55 Dataset. The dataset consists of APPS-derived programming tasks translated into Dafny verification problems taken from the vericoding benchmark [37]. Each example is formatted as a single user message with ability = dafny . A prompt contains a natural-language programming task, formal Dafny specification requirements, optional helper predicates or functions, and a target method or function with an empty body to synthesize. The common initial file is formatted as: 

// ======= TASK ======= // Natural-language programming problem // ======= SPEC REQUIREMENTS ======= // Dafny predicates, functions, requires clauses, and ensures clauses // ======= HELPERS ======= // Optional helper definitions // ======= MAIN METHOD ======= method solve(...) returns (...) requires ... ensures ... {}

The training split contains 618 prompts and the held-out validation split contains 265 prompts. Although most target methods are named solve , some examples use task-specific names; we therefore refer to the generated object as the target method or function rather than assuming a fixed method name. 56 Split Examples Median chars Mean chars 95th percentile chars Train 618 1394 1711.5 4008.8 Validation 265 1323 1665.1 3556.8 Table 4.1: Prompt-level statistics for the Dafny APPS-derived dataset. 

Training infrastructure. Training was run on an 8-GPU node with NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB GPUs. Each training batch contained 16 prompts, and each prompt produced 8 sampled responses before filtering, yielding up to 128 Dafny reward evaluations per rollout batch. Training was configured for 30 epochs, with validation enabled before the first training update. Setting Value Base model Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 

RL framework verl 

Advantage estimator grpo 

Reward manager dapo 

Prompt batch size 16 Rollouts per prompt 8PPO mini-batch size 4Max prompt length 2048 Max response length 8192 Weight decay 0.1 Clip ratio low / high 0.20 / 0.28 Table 4.2: Initial RLVR training configuration. 

KL configuration. Although Section 4.1 presents the general KL-regularized RLVR objective, runs disable both reward-level and loss-level KL penalties. Thus, this isolates the effect of verifier-derived reward under a critic-free group-relative update, without explicit KL anchoring to the reference policy. 

Verifier and reward function. Each sampled model response was converted into Dafny code before scoring. The extracted code was checked in two stages. First, Dafny was run in build mode with verification disabled. If the artifact built successfully, the reward function 57 then ran verification. The initial reward was staged: 

r0(x, y ) = 



1.0, if the artifact builds, verifies, and passes anti-cheating checks ,

0.1, if the artifact builds and passes anti-cheating checks but does not verify ,

0.0, otherwise .

The anti-cheating check compared the pre and post condition (i.e., requires, ensures )clauses in the original template against those in the generated artifact after whitespace normalization. It also filtered explicit Dafny escape hatches, including assume false and 

{:verify false} . Thus, a completion that verifies only by weakening the contract or disabling verification receives the cheating reward, which was set to 0.0 in the initial run. 

Evaluation. Evaluation used the held-out Dafny APPS-derived validation split of 265 problems. In the initial run, evaluation was based primarily on the staged reward returned by the Dafny reward function. Thus, the first train/test curves should be read as aggregate reward curves rather than a full decomposition of verifier behavior. Later sections refine this signal by separating build success, verification success, specification changes, and reward-hacking examples. 

# 4.3 RL from Verifier Feedback: Initial Results 

Having defined the model, data, reward function, and training configuration above, we now analyze the behavior of the initial single-turn Dafny RLVR run. For each prompt, the policy sampled Dafny completions, the extracted artifacts were scored by the staged Dafny build/verify reward (see Eq. 4.2), and DAPO updates were applied using these verifier-derived rewards. 58 Aggregate reward dynamics. Figure 4.2 shows the average staged reward on the training and validation splits over the course of RL training. Because the reward function assigns partial credit for buildable but non-verifying artifacts, these curves measure aggregate verifier-facing progress rather than verified correctness alone. 

Figure 4.2: Reward trajectory for the initial single-turn RLVR run. The training curve reports the mean verifier-based reward over sampled training rollouts, where each prompt produces K = 8 completions for group-relative optimization. The validation curve reports mean reward on the held-out validation set using a single sampled completion per prompt, so it measures held-out single-sample performance rather than best-of-K success. Training reward is logged at every optimization step, while validation reward is evaluated every five steps, producing a sparser validation curve. The validation reward falls below the training reward on average, a pattern consistent with overfitting to the training distribution. The reward curves show that the model quickly learned to optimize the staged verifier signal. Before RL, the base policy achieved an average validation reward of only 0.022 ,indicating that almost none of its sampled completions received meaningful reward under the Dafny pipeline. After RL training, the validation reward rose sharply, reaching a best value of 0.581 at step 430. This suggests that the verifier reward was not too sparse to train on. At the same time, the later part of training shows signs of over-optimization. The final checkpoint reached a higher sampled training reward of 0.752 , but its validation reward decreased to 0.539 (See Table 4.3. This divergence suggests that the model continued to improve on the sampled training rollouts while becoming less aligned with the held-out 59 validation distribution, a sign of over-fitting. Checkpoint Step/Epoch Train reward Validation reward Train–val gap Before RL 0 / 0.00 – 0.022 –Best validation 430 / 11.32 0.595 0.581 +0.013 Final validation 500 / 13.16 0.752 0.539 +0.212 Table 4.3: Aggregate reward statistics for the initial single-turn Dafny RLVR run. Validation reward is the mean verifier reward over the validation set; train reward is the mean verifier reward over sampled training rollouts. Across the run, training completed 13.263 epochs and made an estimated 199,662 Dafny verifier calls. These results show that verifier-derived rewards provide a usable optimization signal for the policy, but they do not by themselves establish improved verification ability. 

Limitations of aggregate reward. Aggregate reward conflates several behaviors: pro-ducing syntactically valid Dafny, satisfying the intended specification, exploiting prompt artifacts, and modifying the effective verification problem while passing the anti-cheating checks. Thus, the reward curve measures optimization of the verifier pipeline, not necessarily semantic progress on the original tasks. This motivates the rollout-level analysis in the next section. In particular, we inspect whether reward improvements correspond to genuine verification success or to degenerate strategies that exploit the staged reward function. 

# 4.4 Specification Hacking: Discovery and Analysis 

Rollout-level diagnostic. To investigate the source of the reward gains, we inspected the five validation prompts logged at each validation checkpoint. This analysis is diagnostic rather than exhaustive: it does not decompose the full validation set, but instead uses the logged rollouts to identify concrete mechanisms by which high reward was obtained. 60 Figure 4.3: Logged validation diagnostics for the initial single-turn RLVR run. Left: Mean number of generated characters added to the prompt program, grouped by verifier outcome. 

Right: Character-level mean similarity between each checkpoint output and the final generated program for each of the five logged prompts, with the across-prompt mean shown in black. The rapid collapse in generated length and the early rise in similarity toward one suggest that the model quickly converges to short, repeated outputs, consistent with specification-hacking behavior rather than substantive program synthesis. 

Observed patterns. Figure 4.3 shows two patterns in the logged rollouts. First, verified completions are often short, typically adding only a small method body or a direct call to an existing helper. Second, generations become increasingly stable across checkpoints: the final-output similarity rises over training, indicating convergence toward repeated Dafny templates for the logged prompts. These patterns suggest that the policy learned compact reward-seeking behaviors, not just general-purpose Dafny synthesis. 

Specification artifacts. Manual inspection of the logged validation completions revealed two dominant failure modes. First, some tasks had trivial or underconstrained postconditions, allowing constant implementations to verify. Second, some tasks leaked the solution through helper functions or predicates that appeared directly in the postcondition. In both cases, the model received verifier reward without synthesizing the intended algorithm. 61 Example 1: Trivial Specification. In one logged prompt (Cowbell Packing), the post-condition only required the returned value to be nonnegative: 

method solve(n: int, k: int, L: seq<int>) returns (result: int) requires ValidInput(n, k, L) ensures result >= 0 {}

The following completion verifies: 

{result := 0; }

This is a valid implementation with respect to the formal contract, but it does not solve the intended task. The verifier reward is therefore correct relative to the specification, while the specification itself is too weak to define the desired behavior. 

Example 2: Specification Leakage. In another logged prompt (Farm-area), the specifi-cation exposed a helper function that directly computed the required output: 

function RemainingFarmArea(a: int, b: int): int requires ValidFarmDimensions(a, b) {a * b - a - b + 1 }method solve(a: int, b: int) returns (result: int) requires ValidFarmDimensions(a, b) 

62 Failure mode Specification artifact Reward-seeking behavior    

> Trivial specification Postcondition underconstrains the intended task. Return a constant or no-op value that satisfies the weak contract. Specification leakage Helper function or predicate di-rectly encodes the target behavior. Call the helper or branch on the predicate instead of synthesizing the algorithm. Optimize for Build Staged reward gives partial credit for code that builds but does not verify. Converge toward syntactically valid Dafny templates even with-out full verification.

Table 4.4: Specification-hacking patterns observed in the logged validation rollouts. 

ensures result == RemainingFarmArea(a, b) ensures result >= 0 {}

The model can obtain full verifier reward by simply returning the leaked helper: 

{result := RemainingFarmArea(a, b); }

Again, the completion satisfies the formal specification, but it bypasses the intended synthesis problem. Rather than deriving or implementing the algorithm, the model delegates the computation to an abstraction already provided in the prompt. We also found examples where the predicate itself encodes the target behavior (See Appendix). Together, these examples illustrate two distinct ways that high verifier reward can fail to reflect the intended synthesis task. We also observe a weaker form of reward optimization in which the model converges toward buildable Dafny templates, consistent with the partial reward assigned to non-verifying artifacts that pass build checks. Table 4.4 summarizes these patterns. 

Implications. The issue is not that the verifier reward failed, but that it optimized exactly the formal objective it was given. Trivial contracts rewarded constant implementations, leaked 63 helpers rewarded direct calls to the answer, and the staged reward encouraged buildable outputs even without verification. This motivates the next pipeline revision: filtering the data distribution toward faithful, non-leaky, and nontrivial specifications so that verifier reward is better aligned with the intended synthesis task. 

# 4.5 Improving the Pipeline: Data Filtering 

Motivation. The previous analysis indicates that the data distribution itself is part of the reward design. If a prompt contains a weak or leaky specification, then Dafny verification provides a correct but misaligned reward. We therefore first filter the dataset using LLM-extracted metadata about specification faithfulness, specification leakage, and task difficulty. This produces a cleaner subset in which high reward is more likely to correspond to genuine verification progress rather than exploitation of specification artifacts. For our base dataset, we consider the entire Vericoding benchmark to widen our scope past the initial APPS set. Source Initial Dafny Filtered subset Train Test 

apps 677 196 155 41 

bignum 62 50 37 13 

dafnybench 443 294 240 54 

humaneval 162 102 86 16 

numpy_simple 58 26 17 9

numpy_triple 603 309 255 54 

verified_cogen 172 76 57 19 

verina 157 96 72 24 

Total 2334 1149 919 230 

Table 4.5: Source composition of the quality-filtered Dafny tasks drawn from the Vericoding benchmark [37]. The initial Dafny column reports the number of Dafny tasks available from each source before filtering. The filtered subset retains tasks with faithful, low-leakage, and nontrivial specifications, which are then split into train and test sets. 

LLM-generated metadata. We filter tasks using three LLM-generated annotations with Claude’s Opus 4.5, where each score sits 0-3. The difficulty score measures the assessed 64 hardness of the task with larger values indicating more difficult verification problems. The 

spec_faithfulness score measures whether the Dafny specification matches the intended natural-language task, while spec_leakage measures whether the specification reveals exces-sive implementation structure or makes the task trivial. We then applied the following quality filter: 

spec_faithfulness ≥ 2, spec_leakage ≤ 1, difficulty ≥ 1.

Unlike the initial RLVR experiment, which used APPS-derived Dafny tasks, this filter was applied to the full set of Dafny problems included in the Vericoding benchmark [37]. We choose to not constrain the spec_leakage to 0 to allow for some realistic leeway with specification errors. The resulting data contained 1,149 Dafny verification tasks. The breakdown by source can be found in Table 4.5 

Prompt format. The hard-subset experiments also use a different output format from the initial APPS-derived setup, taken from Bursuc et al. [37]. Instead of asking the model to emit a single Dafny completion, the prompt asks for a JSON object whose fields separately specify code for helper definitions, additional definitions, and the main target implementation. This makes extraction more structured. After generation, the corresponding JSON fields are then inserted into the appropriate regions of the Dafny template before running the build and verification checks. The reward function is still computed from the resulting Dafny artifact, but the model’s output space is more explicitly aligned with the editable regions of the benchmark files. 

Effect on training. We next repeated the checkpoint-level reward analysis from the initial run on the quality-filtered hard subset. Figure 4.4 compares the training-rollout and held-out reward trajectories, and Table 4.6 summarizes the corresponding pre-RL, best-held-out, and final checkpoints. 65 Figure 4.4: Reward trajectories for the initial APPS-derived run and the quality-filtered hard-subset run. The left panel shows average verifier reward over sampled training rollouts, while the right panel shows held-out verifier reward at evaluation checkpoints. The hard-subset run reaches substantially lower rewards and plateaus, indicating that the filtering procedure produces a more difficult verifier-feedback training distribution. The hard-subset run produces substantially lower absolute rewards, consistent with a stricter distribution that removes unfaithful, leaky, and trivial specifications. Its held-out reward increases from 0.003 before RL to 0.247 at step 120, but falls to 0.097 by the final checkpoint. Training reward decreases over the same interval, from 0.197 to 0.090, so the degradation is not driven by a widening train–held-out gap. Thus, the hard-subset run exhibits less apparent overfitting to sampled training rollouts, but also fails to sustain post-RL improvement. We interpret this as evidence that the filtered distribution provides a stricter and more diagnostic reward signal: verifier reward is harder to obtain but now more closely tied to general Dafny vericoding ability rather than artifacts of the initial APPS-derived setting. This motivates further experiments with improved base models and multi-turn reward environments. 

# 4.6 Multi-Turn Training with Verifier Feedback 

Motivation. Single-shot RLVR treats verifier failure as a terminal outcome. In Dafny, however, failures are often structured: the verifier can identify failed postconditions, assertions, 66 Run Checkpoint Step / epoch Train Held-out Gap Initial run Before RL 0 / 0.00 – 0.022 –Initial run Best held-out 430 / 11.32 0.595 0.581 0.013 Initial run Final 500 / 13.16 0.752 0.539 0.212 Hard-subset run Before RL 0 / 0.00 – 0.003 –Hard-subset run Best held-out 120 / 5.71 0.197 0.247 -0.050 Hard-subset run Final 150 / 7.14 0.090 0.097 -0.007 

Table 4.6: Checkpoint-level reward comparison between the initial APPS-derived RLVR run and the run on the quality-filtered hard subset. 

Figure 4.5: Multi-turn verifier-feedback environment for Dafny RLVR. The policy samples a JSON replacement at attempt t, after which the environment reconstructs the Dafny file and evaluates it with dafny build / dafny verify . If verification succeeds, the trajectory terminates with discounted reward γt−1; otherwise, verifier diagnostics define a local repair state for attempt t + 1 , until either success or the K = 4 attempt limit is reached. The final trajectory reward is used for the GRPO/DAPO update. invariants, type constraints, or compilation errors. These diagnostics provide localized information about why a candidate failed. We therefore extend the environment from single-shot synthesis to bounded multi-turn repair, allowing the policy to condition subsequent attempts on verifier feedback. 

Verifier-feedback environment. We model Dafny repair as a finite-horizon verifier-feedback Markov decision process with an absorbing success state. For task i, let xi denote the original Dafny problem and let K = 4 be the maximum number of attempts. The initial state si, 1 is the single-shot synthesis prompt constructed from xi. At attempt t, the policy 67 samples an action 

ai,t ∼ πθ(· | si,t ),

where ai,t is a candidate JSON replacement. The environment reconstructs a Dafny file yi,t 

from this replacement and evaluates it with the Dafny compiler and verifier. If yi,t verifies, the episode transitions to a terminal success state. Otherwise, the verifier output ei,t is converted into a new repair state 

si,t +1 = Φ( xi, y i,t , e i,t ),

where Φ constructs a retry prompt containing the original Dafny problem, the most recent failed reconstruction, and the corresponding verifier diagnostics. The repair state is therefore local rather than transcript-based: it does not accumulate the full sequence of previous attempts. This design isolates the effect of structured verifier feedback by testing whether the policy can use the most recent formal failure signal to produce a corrected program. Episodes terminate after successful verification or after K

attempts, so the environment measures both eventual verification and the efficiency with which verification is reached. 

Reward shaping over repair attempts. Within this finite-horizon process, we use a discounted first-success reward. For each task i, let vi,t ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether the candidate verifies on attempt t ∈ { 1, . . . , K }, where K = 4 . The first successful attempt is Ti = min {t : vi,t = 1 }, when such an attempt exists. Successful trajectories receive a discounted terminal reward 

Rsucc  

> i

= γTi−1, γ = 0 .75 .

This objective preserves verification as the primary criterion while making repair efficiency part of the reward: later success remains valuable, but earlier success is preferred. 68 For unsuccessful attempts, the base verifier reward is 

rbase (y) = 



−0.5, if y modifies the specification or bypasses verification ,

−0.1, if y cannot be parsed as valid JSON ,

0.0, if y produces a Dafny build failure ,

0.1, if y builds but fails verification ,

1.0, if y verifies successfully .

Note we added a “cheating detector" to extremely penalize the model if it changes the specification or uses bypass statements (i.e. assume false ). For successful trajectories, the final case is replaced by the discounted success reward γTi−1. Outputs that exceed the generation budget receive an additional linear overlength penalty. If ℓ(y) is the output length, 

ℓmax = 5120 is the nominal length limit, B = 1024 is the overlength buffer, and λ is the penalty factor, then 

rlen (y) = min 



−max(0 , ℓ (y) − ℓmax )

B λ, 0



.

The total reward assigned to an attempt is therefore 

r(y, t ) = 



γt−1 + rlen (y), if y verifies successfully on attempt t, rbase (y) + rlen (y), otherwise .

Training setup. The multi-turn environment required a different training architecture from the initial single-turn RLVR run. In the initial experiment, rollouts consisted of one generation followed by one verifier call. Here, each rollout trajectory may contain up to four generations and four verifier calls, with intermediate retry prompts constructed online from verifier feedback. We therefore moved from the self-managed verl setup used in the initial 7B experiment to a Tinker-based LoRA RL setup, which supports larger-model policy 69 optimization with online environment interaction. The actor policy was initialized from Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 and adapted with rank-16 LoRA. This increase in model capacity is motivated by the harder policy required in the multi-turn setting: the model must parse Dafny diagnostics, localize the failure in its previous candidate, and produce a valid JSON replacement that improves the reconstructed program. Thus, the larger model and Tinker infrastructure should be viewed as enabling choices for studying verifier-feedback RL, rather than as an isolated model-size ablation. Training used GRPO with DAPO-style settings. Each batch contained 16 Dafny problems, and each problem was expanded into a group of four independent rollout environments. Within each environment, the policy could make at most K = 4 attempts: one initial generation followed by up to three feedback-guided repairs. Advantages were computed groupwise from total trajectory rewards (GRPO) and then normalized at the token level. The objective used asymmetric clipping with lower and upper deviations 0.20 and 0.28 ,corresponding to ratio bounds [0 .8, 1.28] , and no KL penalty. The response length budget was reduced to 6144 tokens, with the overlength penalty applied linearly over the 5120–6144 token window. All hyperparameters are specified in Table 4.7. Setting Value Base model Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 

RL framework Tinker LoRA RL Policy Optimizer DAPO Prompt batch size 16 Rollouts per prompt 4Max response length 6144 Clip ratio low / high 0.20 / 0.28 LoRA rank 16 Max attempts per rollout 4Reward scheme Discounted first-success reward Decay factor γ = 0 .75 

Overlength penalty window 5120–6144 tokens Constant-reward groups Removed KL penalty 0Table 4.7: Multi-turn RL training configuration with online verifier feedback. 70 Evaluation metrics. We evaluate whether this online verifier-feedback setup improves not only total reward, but also the intermediate behaviors required for repair. In addition to mean total trajectory reward, we measure build success and verification success, failure-mode rates (i.e., JSON-format errors, Dafny build failures), and average turns per episode and token usage per turn to assess repair efficiency and the cost of multi-turn interaction. 

Results. We analyze the multi-turn run through a sequence of diagnostics. We first examine total trajectory reward, then decompose this aggregate signal into build and verification success, and finally inspect failure modes and interaction efficiency. Figure 6(a) shows that total trajectory reward improves over training, with held-out reward increasing to approximately 0.32 by the final logged checkpoint. This indicates that training in the multi-turn verifier-feedback environment improves the policy’s ability to produce higher-reward Dafny repair trajectories. Because the single-turn and multi-turn runs use different reward definitions, raw reward values are not directly comparable across settings. We therefore compare them using outcome-oriented held-out metrics. In the single-turn run, reward@1 measures the staged verifier reward after one attempt. In the multi-turn run, verify@ ≤ 4 measures whether any attempt in the bounded repair episode verifies.              

> Checkpoint ST reward@1 MT proxy MT verify@ ≤4
> Before RL 0.003 [0.054, 0.066] 0.054 Best validation 0.247 [0.337, 0.393] 0.325 Final validation 0.097 [0.332, 0.380] 0.311

Table 4.8: Held-out comparison between single-turn (ST) and multi-turn (MT) Dafny RL. The ST and MT runs use different Qwen base models: ST uses a 7B model, while MT uses a 

30 B model. The comparison should therefore be read as a comparison of the resulting systems, not as an isolated ablation of turn structure alone. ST reward@1 is the one-attempt staged reward from the single-turn run. MT proxy scores the best episode outcome within four attempts. This is reported as a range because build-at-least-once is bounded from aggregate turn-level build logs rather than observed directly at the episode level. MT verify@ ≤ 4 is the fraction of episodes verified within the four-attempt repair budget. Table 4.8 shows that the multi-turn setup substantially improves held-out verification 71 Figure 4.6: Training diagnostics for the multi-turn Dafny RLVR run on the quality-filtered Dafny subset. From top to bottom, the panels show total trajectory reward, build and verification success, and primary failure modes over training. We observe stages of JSON-format errors decline, build success improvements, and steady improvement in verification success. This suggests that the model initially prioritizes syntactically valid and structurally acceptable Dafny artifacts. The later resurgence in build failures likely reflects a shift toward more ambitious completions as the model searches for verification gains. 72 within the repair budget, reaching 0.325 at the best validation checkpoint and 0.311 at the final checkpoint. Since model scale, infrastructure, interaction protocol, and reward definition all change simultaneously, this comparison should be interpreted as evidence for the promise of online verifier-feedback training rather than as an isolated ablation. Because total reward aggregates several outcomes, Figure 6(b) separates build success from verification success. Build success increases sharply, from roughly 5% on validation at the beginning of training to approximately 67% at the final logged checkpoint. Verification success also improves, but more modestly, rising from approximately 1–2% initially to approximately 

10% on validation. This distinction is important because much of the reward improvement corresponds to moving generations from malformed or non-compiling outputs into buildable Dafny programs; full proof success remains the more difficult bottleneck. 

Figure 4.7: Average number of turns per episode during the multi-turn Dafny RLVR run. The number of turns decreases over training, indicating that episodes increasingly terminate earlier as the model learns to become more efficient in response to the decaying reward Figure 6(c) shows the corresponding failure-mode decomposition. JSON-format failures decrease rapidly, falling from roughly 70% of validation turns at the start of training to approximately 1–2% by the end. Build failures initially become more prominent as outputs begin to pass JSON parsing, but later decline relative to their peak. This suggests that the policy first learns the interaction protocol—returning parseable JSON replacements—and 73 then begins to improve Dafny-level syntactic and type correctness. 

Figure 4.8: Prompt and response token lengths during the multi-turn Dafny RLVR run. Generated responses become shorter over training, while prompt lengths increase as failed attempts and verifier diagnostics are incorporated into subsequent repair prompts. This reflects the changing cost structure of the multi-turn environment: later turns carry more context, even as the model’s generated artifacts become more compact. Figure 4.7 tracks the average number of turns per episode. The validation average decreases from approximately 3.86 turns to approximately 3.14 turns over training. Interpreted together with Figure 6(b), this indicates that the improvement is not solely due to using all available repair attempts. Together with the increase in build and verification success, this suggests that the model increasingly uses the repair budget more efficiently rather than simply exhausting all four attempts. Finally, Figure 4.8 shows generated-token and prompt-token lengths per turn. Generated outputs become shorter over training, decreasing from roughly 220 tokens per turn to roughly 

125 –130 tokens per turn on validation. Prompt lengths, by contrast, increase moderately, reflecting the larger verifier-feedback prompts used in later repair turns. This helps rule out simple length growth as the explanation for the reward trend: performance improves while generated responses become more concise. Overall, the multi-turn run appears to learn the verifier interaction protocol first, then improves compilation success, and finally achieves a smaller but meaningful gain in full verification. These results support the utility of online compiler and verifier feedback as a 74 training environment, while also showing that verification remains substantially harder than producing well-formed or buildable Dafny code. 

Qualitative analysis. The rollout traces suggest that the multi-turn setup primarily improves first-attempt behavior rather than producing reliable iterative repair. Table 4.9 sum-marizes this pattern across a set of logged trajectories. Successful trajectories overwhelmingly verify on the first attempt, while post-failure repair remains rare; among trajectories with a failed first attempt, a large fraction later collapse to empty or near-empty replacements.               

> Statistic Train logs Validation logs Logged trajectories 800 320 Verified trajectories 256 (32.0%) 90 (28.1%) Verified on first attempt 242 (94.5% of verified) 87 (96.7% of verified) Verified after failed attempt 14 (1.8% of all) 3 (0.9% of all) Failed-first trajectories 558 233 Minimal-edit collapse after failure 293 (52.5%) –

Table 4.9: Logged multi-turn rollout summary. Most verified trajectories succeed on the first attempt, while successful repair after an earlier failure is rare. Minimal-edit collapse is measured only for training logs, where full generated text is available. 

Case 1: minimal-edit collapse. In FindCommonType , the first attempt produced a substantive loop-based implementation, but Dafny could not establish the key invariant on entry: 

invariant maxArr in array_types[0..i] invariant forall j :: 0 <= j < i ==> Precedence(array_types[j]) <= Precedence(maxArr) 

Rather than strengthening the invariant or changing the loop initialization, later attempts collapsed to empty replacements: 

Attempt 2: ["", "{}"] -> verification failure Attempt 3: ["", ""] -> build failure Attempt 4: ["", ""] -> build failure 

75 This illustrates a common failure mode: after receiving verifier feedback, the policy often reduced the program to low-information edits instead of performing semantic proof repair. 

Case 2: successful verifier-guided repair. In contrast, the max example shows a rare successful repair. The first attempt was close, but the loop invariant was not strong enough to prove the postcondition is_max(max, a, n) :

invariant is_max(max, a, i) invariant max == a[0] && forall j :: 0 <= j < i && j < n ==> a[j] <= max 

After intermediate failed attempts, the final attempt introduced an invariant that directly decomposed the postcondition into containment and upper-bound facts: 

invariant 0 < i <= n && contains(max, a, i) && upper_bound(max, a, i) invariant forall j :: 0 <= j < i ==> a[j] <= max 

This fourth attempt verified, showing that verifier feedback can occasionally guide a semanti-cally meaningful invariant repair, although such repairs remained rare in this run. 

# 4.7 Discussion: Reflections on Data-Scarce RL 

The central lesson of this work is that RLVR is not reward-model free in the strong sense. It removes the learned reward model, but it moves reward design into the formal artifact. In Dafny, the verifier deterministically checks whether the assembled program satisfies the specification presented to it: 

VDafny (Assemble( x, y )) = verified .

This is a clean machine-checkable signal, but it is only a signal for φgiven , not necessarily for the intended task φintended . The gap between those two specifications is where much of the 76 difficulty in this chapter appears. Table 4.10 summarizes the main results. The initial RLVR run reached 53 .9% held-out reward on the APPS-derived validation split, showing that Dafny verifier feedback is strong enough to optimize an LLM policy. However, Section 4.4 showed that this number overstated genuine synthesis progress: weak postconditions, leaked helper functions, and staged build rewards created cheap reward channels. After filtering toward faithful, low-leakage, nontrivial specifications in Section 4.5, single-turn RLVR became much harder and ended at 9.7% 

held-out reward. The multi-turn verifier-feedback setup recovered to 31 .1% verify@ ≤ 4 on the hard subset, suggesting that online compiler and verifier feedback can partially compensate for the sparsity of the cleaner reward signal.                         

> Method Hard subset APPStest Overall Initial RLVR –53.9% (val) –Filtered RLVR 9.7% (val) ––Multi-turn RLVR 31.1% (val) ––Gemini 2.5 Flash –36.9% (all) 38.2% (all) GPT-5 mini –71.6% (all) 66.9% (all) Claude Opus 4.1 –66.6% (all) 67.5% (all) Model union –83.0% (all) 82.2% (all)

Table 4.10: Part I verifier-success summary for our Dafny RLVR runs, with external Vericoding reference points for context. The RLVR rows report held-out validation results from our experiments: the initial single-turn run on the APPS-derived validation set, the filtered single-turn run on the quality-filtered Dafny hard subset, and the multi-turn run on the same hard subset. The Gemini, GPT, Claude, and model-union rows report Dafny pass rates from Vericoding on the APPS test source and the overall Dafny benchmark aggregate. Values marked val are our validation results; values marked all are Vericoding-reported benchmark results. External rows use five attempts per task, except ten attempts on BigNum [37], and should be read as contextual reference points rather than controlled baselines. The sharper interpretation is that the data distribution is part of the reward function. In GRPO-style training, a prompt provides useful group-relative signal only when its sampled completions receive different rewards. For binary verifier rewards, if each completion for prompt x succeeds independently with probability px, then a group of size K is non-degenerate with probability 1 − pKx − (1 − px)K . This probability is small when the task is either too easy 77 or too hard. Thus, data-scarce RLVR depends on prompts near the model’s capability frontier: tasks where some completions verify and others fail. The initial APPS-derived distribution contained many easy or exploitable prompts, so reward improved quickly. Filtering removed many of these cheap reward channels, making the signal more faithful but also sparser. In short, filtering improved reward validity while worsening RL credit assignment. The multi-turn environment partially relaxes this sparsity. Rather than making Dafny failure terminal, it exposes verifier diagnostics and allows bounded repair. This gives the policy intermediate behaviors to learn: producing valid JSON, generating buildable Dafny, reaching verification, and doing so in fewer attempts. The training dynamics follow this progression: JSON errors collapse first, build success rises next, and verification improves more slowly. The multi-turn run therefore succeeds as an online verifier-feedback environment, but not yet as a robust repair learner. Most verified trajectories still succeed on the first attempt, while success after an initial failure remains rare. The model actually becomes a stronger first-shot Dafny generator before it becomes a reliable proof-repair agent. 

Limitations Small effective RL dataset. The filtered hard subset contains only 1,149 tasks, with 919 training examples. This is small by GRPO-style reasoning standards: DAPO, for instance, trains on 17K math prompts and samples 512 prompts × 16 responses per rollout step [97]. More importantly, GRPO does not learn from prompts uniformly. Since advantages are computed relative to other samples from the same prompt, a prompt is informative only when its sampled completions receive different rewards. All-failure and all-success groups contribute little useful signal. Thus, the effective RL dataset is smaller than the prompt count suggests: GRPO learns mainly from tasks where the current policy is inconsistent, not from tasks it always fails or always solves. 78 Reward brittleness. Staged reward made the initial experiment trainable by giving partial credit for buildable programs, but it also encouraged build-oriented templates. Raw verification is similarly brittle: a program can verify because the specification is weak, a helper function leaks the answer, or the completion changes the effective proof obligation. The anti-cheating filters catch obvious violations such as modified contracts, assume false , and 

{:verify false} , but they cannot fully detect semantic underspecification or specification leakage. 

Experimental confounding. The multi-turn experiment changes several variables at once: model scale, infrastructure, LoRA adaptation, interaction protocol, reward definition, and attempt budget. The gain from 9.7% to 31 .1% is therefore evidence for the promise of the overall online verifier-feedback setup, not a clean causal estimate of multi-turn feedback alone. 

Weak post-failure repair. The current multi-turn policy often learns the protocol and improves initial generations, but after a failed proof it may collapse to empty or low-information edits rather than preserving useful code and strengthening the relevant invariant or assertion. This distinction is important: verify@ ≤ 4 measures bounded opportunity, not necessarily repair competence. 

Future Work Tool-using verifier agents. The most direct next step is to turn the policy from a generator into a tool-using verifier agent. The current environment gives Dafny feedback after a candidate is produced, but the model does not actively decide when to call tools, inspect diagnostics, retrieve lemmas, or run intermediate checks. Future work should make these actions part of the policy interface, closer to reasoning-and-acting agents such as ReAct and Toolformer [101,102], but with formal tools: compiler, verifier, local context retrieval, lemma search, and proof-obligation inspection. 79 Repair-specific supervision. Terminal verification reward is too coarse to teach targeted proof repair. Future systems should mine or generate failed-to-verified trajectories of the form 

(x, y fail , e dafny ) 7 → yrepair ,

where edafny is the compiler or verifier diagnostic. These trajectories would teach the model to preserve useful partial solutions, localize the failed proof obligation, and make minimal semantic edits. This connects to self-refinement methods such as Self-Refine and Reflexion [103,104], but replaces language-model critique with grounded verifier feedback. 

Curriculum learning for verifier feedback. Future work should also treat task selection as part of the training algorithm. The hard-subset experiments show that filtering improves reward faithfulness but also makes the learning signal sparser. A natural next step is curriculum learning over verifier difficulty: begin with tasks where the base model has a nonzero probability of success, then gradually shift toward harder prompts as the policy improves [105]. For group-relative methods, this is especially important because useful gradients arise primarily from prompts whose sampled completions produce mixed outcomes rather than uniformly failing or uniformly succeeding. A verifier-aware curriculum could therefore sample frontier tasks whose empirical success rate lies between these extremes, while continuing to exclude tasks with weak, leaky, or unfaithful specifications. This makes the proposal closer to adaptive or teacher-student curriculum learning, where training examples are selected based on the learner’s current progress, rather than a fixed easy-to-hard ordering [106]. 

Faithful data scaling. Dafny data scarcity is structural, so future work should combine human solutions, teacher-model rollouts, synthetic tasks, verified repairs, and rejection sampling. The key is not simply more verified programs, but more faithful specifications and more nontrivial repair states. STaR-style bootstrapping and formal synthetic-data pipelines 80 such as DeepSeek-Prover suggest one route [32,107], but Dafny adds an extra requirement: synthetic tasks must be filtered for specification faithfulness in translation, not just verifier success. 

Cross-verifier transfer. Future work should also evaluate domain transfer across verifiers. Dafny, Lean, Verus, and unit-tested programming tasks all provide verifiable rewards. Multi-language RLVR could test whether verifier feedback teaches general repair behavior or only environment-specific syntax and reward hacks. Recent RLVR systems show that verifiable rewards can scale reasoning, but mostly within fixed domains [108][94] [109]. The open question is whether these gains transfer across formal systems, or remain tied to each environment’s syntax, tools, and reward channels. In summary, the next step is not simply more RL. This chapter shows that verifier feedback can train Dafny-capable policies, but it also shows that RL faithfully amplifies whatever objective the verifier exposes. Weak specifications produce reward hacking; filtered specifications produce a cleaner but sparser learning problem; and multi-turn feedback improves interaction without yet guaranteeing genuine repair. Data-scarce RLVR, therefore, depends on the entire training environment: the specification must be unambiguous, the tasks must elicit informative failure modes, the verifier must return feedback the model can act on, and evaluation must distinguish first-shot success from genuine post-failure repair. The central challenge is not obtaining a machine-checkable reward, but making that reward faithful enough to optimize against and informative enough to learn from. 81 82 Chapter 5 Part II: Agentic Scaffolding 

# 5.1 Preliminaries: Agentic Systems for Formal Methods 

Part I used verifier feedback to improve the model. Although that setting included multi-turn verifier-feedback episodes, the interaction remained model-centric: verifier responses were incorporated through a fixed feedback protocol, and the learning objective was to update the policy πθ. This chapter studies the complementary system-centric setting. Here, verifier feedback is used directly by an inference-time scaffold that maintains state, invokes tools, and controls search over candidate Lean artifacts. The distinction is therefore not single-turn versus multi-turn interaction, but training a policy from verifier feedback versus using verifier feedback as an online observation for search. This shift is natural for Lean verified coding. Candidate solutions must pass elaboration, type checking, tactic execution, and kernel checking, yielding both a precise success criterion and structured intermediate signals. Failed attempts expose goals, local context, type errors, missing facts, and tactic failures. Part II uses these signals not merely to repair a single trajectory, but to guide stateful inference: branching, retrieval, decomposition, and termination. 83 From direct generation to scaffolded search. The simplest inference mode is one-shot generation . The model receives a Lean verified-coding task and emits a complete candidate solution, which is then accepted or rejected by Lean. This baseline is attractive because it is simple, cheap, and easy to evaluate. The next strongest baseline is best-of-n sampling. The model samples multiple independent candidates, and the system keeps the first candidate that verifies. Best-of-n uses Lean as a selection oracle and can improve success when correct solutions are already present in the model’s sampling distribution. However, each attempt remains independent. A more interactive strategy is iterative repair . Here the system feeds a failed candidate and its Lean diagnostics back to the model, asks for a revised candidate, and repeats this loop. This mirrors a common pattern in code and language-agent systems: generate an artifact, observe feedback from an external tool, and revise the artifact in response [101][103,104,110,111]. For formal methods, repair is especially appealing because the feedback comes from the same verifier that defines success. Nevertheless, iterative repair remains limited. It can become trapped in local edit cycles, repair superficial errors while preserving a bad proof plan, or spend its entire budget on a single trajectory that should have been abandoned earlier. The main mode considered in this chapter is a hierarchical scaffold . Rather than asking a single model to produce a complete Lean artifact in one pass, the system decomposes a hard verification task into smaller subgoals and delegates those subgoals to worker model calls. Successful subproofs are then recombined into the parent artifact and checked again by Lean. In this view, hierarchy is primarily a mechanism for exposing intermediate proof structure: the scaffold turns one difficult theorem or verified-coding task into a tree of smaller obligations that can be solved, repaired, and verified locally. These inference modes form a progression: one-shot → best-of-n → iterative repair → hierarchical subgoal decomposition .

84 The hierarchical scaffold is best viewed as a generalization of simpler inference strategies: it still uses generation, verification, and repair, but organizes them around recursively proposed subgoals rather than a single monolithic proof attempt. 

Agentic scaffolds. In this chapter, an agentic scaffold is an inference-time control system wrapped around a base language model. Rather than treating the model as a standalone solver, the scaffold defines the interface through which model calls interact with the formal environment. Concretely, it specifies five components: the state maintained across attempts, the model roles available to the system, the tools exposed to those roles, the actions they may take, and the controller that executes those actions. The scaffold can be described through five interfaces: The scaffold can be described through five interfaces: 1. State: the evolving proof context, including the original Lean task, the current candidate file, previous attempts, verifier diagnostics, local proof states, retrieved facts, and proposed intermediate claims. 2. Roles: the model-level division between global planning and local solving. A planner proposes proof strategies or decomposes hard obligations into subgoals, while worker models attempt to solve those subgoals. 3. Tools: the interface to Lean and the surrounding repository, including candidate checking, diagnostic extraction, proof-state inspection, and retrieval over relevant lemmas or examples. 4. Actions: the operations available to the scaffold, including generation, repair, retrieval, subgoal proposal, and recombination of solved subproofs into the parent artifact. 5. Controller: the policy that selects which action to execute next and determines when a branch or proof attempt should terminate. 85 This definition emphasizes that the scaffold is not merely a multi-turn prompt. It is a structured inference procedure over formal artifacts. Its central mechanism in this chapter is hierarchical decomposition: a hard Lean verified-coding task is broken into smaller obligations, delegated to worker model calls, locally checked or repaired, and then recombined into a final Lean artifact. Repair, retrieval, and verification are therefore supporting operations inside a broader decomposition-driven search process. This framing also clarifies the relationship between Part I and Part II. In Part I, verifier feedback was used primarily to improve the policy πθ. In Part II, the policy is held inside an explicit scaffold, and verifier feedback becomes an online observation used to guide decomposition, local solving, repair, and recombination. 

Why Lean is a natural setting. Lean is particularly well suited to agentic scaffolding because it provides both a rigorous success criterion and structured intermediate feedback. A completed proof either checks, or it does not. At the same time, Lean exposes information that can guide future attempts: elaboration errors, tactic failures, unsolved goals, local hypotheses, type information, and dependencies on imported or local facts. Lean verified-coding tasks also make the limits of one-shot generation visible. The model may need to synthesize definitions, reason about program behavior, prove auxiliary lemmas, and sequence tactics that interact correctly with local definitions and imported libraries. A small implementation choice can simplify or complicate the proof obligation. A proof may fail not because the overall strategy is wrong, but because the model used the wrong lemma name, chose the wrong induction variable, failed to expose a needed invariant, or attempted to close a goal before establishing an intermediate fact. These are precisely the kinds of failures that can benefit from tool use, retrieval, decomposition, and stateful repair. The dependence on library and local context is especially important. Many Lean proofs are short once the right fact or premise is found, but difficult when the model must infer that fact from the theorem statement alone. Conversely, some proof a single retrieved lemma does 86 not solve all obligations; they require a proof plan that introduces intermediate claims and combines them in the right order. This gives a natural role to hierarchical search. A hard Lean proof may be inaccessible with a single generation, but accessible if the system first proposes subgoals, proves them separately, retrieves supporting facts, and then assembles the final artifact under verifier feedback. 

Relation to prior agentic systems. The scaffold studied in this chapter sits at the intersection of several threads of prior work. General language-agent systems introduced the basic reason–act pattern, where a model interleaves reasoning with tool calls and uses observations to condition later steps [101]. Reflection and self-repair systems showed how feedback from previous attempts can be stored or reintroduced to improve future generations [103,104,110]. Code-agent systems extend this idea with explicit interfaces to files, editors, linters, test runners, and search tools, showing that the design of the agent–computer interface can be as important as the base model [111,112]. Formal theorem proving specializes these ideas to a verifier-rich environment. LeanDojo and ReProver made interaction with Lean and retrieval-augmented theorem proving a reproducible object of study, emphasizing that access to the proof environment and relevant premises is a central bottleneck [51]. COPRA showed that a general-purpose model can be used inside a stateful, backtracking proof-search loop in Lean and Coq, with proof states, retrieved lemmas, and execution feedback informing later actions [113]. These systems already point toward the perspective adopted here: the model is embedded in a loop that observes and acts within a formal environment. A second line of work studies inference-time scaling and decomposition. Best-of-n and verifier-reranking methods demonstrate that additional test-time compute can improve success when the verifier can identify correct outputs, but flat sampling wastes compute on independent attempts. More structured approaches allocate compute adaptively, score partial progress, or search over intermediate states [114,115]. For Lean, decomposition has 87 become especially important. Draft-Sketch-Prove uses informal structure to guide formal proof construction [78]; DeepSeek-Prover-V2 uses recursive subgoal decomposition as part of its formal reasoning pipeline [108]; and Hilbert combines informal reasoning, Lean verification, retrieval, and recursive decomposition to build formal proofs from smaller subproblems [39]. These systems motivate the view that hard formal tasks are often more naturally solved by constructing and checking a proof plan than by sampling a monolithic final proof. Recent Lean agents reinforce the same trend at the system level. Numina-Lean-Agent treats a general coding agent as the outer reasoning loop, using a Lean MCP layer to support autonomous interaction with Lean, theorem retrieval, informal reasoning, and auxiliary proof tools [116]. OpenGauss similarly emphasizes the infrastructure around formalization: project detection, backend management, workflow spawning, and coordinated agent execution over Lean projects [117]. Ax-Prover frames Lean proving as a multi-agent workflow, combining LLM-based reasoning with MCP-based verification tools for iterative formal proof construction [118]. AxiomProver pushes this direction toward autonomous ensemble proving, where multiple agents search for Lean proofs under verifier-backed checking [119]. These systems differ in implementation, but they share a common design lesson: state-of-the-art Lean proving increasingly depends on the system wrapped around the model. Tool access, project-level context, retrieval, proof-state inspection, decomposition, and verifier-backed iteration become part of the inference algorithm itself, rather than post-hoc additions to direct proof generation. 

Benchmark motivation. The empirical sections of this chapter instantiate this perspective on Lean verified-coding benchmarks introduced in Section 3, including Vericoding Lean tasks and the Dalek benchmark introduced earlier in Section 3.2. These benchmarks are useful stress tests for agentic scaffolding because they are not merely shallow syntax-completion problems. They require proof construction, local reasoning about program behavior, auxiliary facts, and interaction with Lean’s verifier. They also exhibit low base-model one-shot success, 88 making them a natural setting for asking whether additional inference-time structure can recover solutions that direct generation misses. 

Chapter contribution. While recent Lean agents have shown the value of tool use, retrieval, and verifier-backed iteration for theorem proving, Lean verified coding introduces a different inference problem. The system must synthesize artifacts that combine program definitions, specifications, auxiliary lemmas, and proofs, where changes to the implementation can alter the proof obligations that must later be discharged. Decomposition is therefore not just a way to split a theorem into mathematical subgoals; it must produce these subgoals that can be solved by worker models and then recombined into a coherent Lean file that still verifies as a whole. This chapter studies that setting through three system components. First, we use hierarchical multi-model decomposition: a planner proposes intermediate subgoals, worker models attempt local proofs, and solved subproofs are inserted back into the parent artifact. Second, we expose Lean through a structured MCP interface that supports checking, diagnostic parsing, proof-state inspection, retrieval, and guardrails against invalid shortcuts. Third, we use progress evaluation to decide when a branch is making useful progress, when it should be repaired, and when it should be abandoned. Together, these components instantiate a verifier-guided scaffold for Lean verified coding, rather than a direct generation or linear repair loop. 

# 5.2 System Overview 

We instantiate the verifier-guided scaffold described above as a two-level system for Lean verified coding. The outer level first adapts the scaffold to the structure of a VeriCoding task: it constructs and revises a sectioned Lean file containing helper, definition, and theorem regions. The inner level is a recursive proof-search engine, which we call RecursiveWorker :given a theorem or lemma obligation, it attempts to prove the obligation directly, decomposes 89 difficult goals into intermediate subgoals, delegates those subgoals to worker model calls, and recombines verified subproofs into the parent artifact. This is directly inspired by HILBERT 

which uses recursive decomposition for theorem proving [39]. The system is verifier-in-the-loop at both levels. Candidate helper, definition, and proof regions are checked against Lean as the artifact is constructed, while theorem and lemma obligations are repeatedly checked during recursive decomposition and recombination. A final successful output is a complete Lean artifact that passes compilation and a no-bypass verification check: theorem statements must be preserved, all proof obligations must be discharged, and the final file must contain no remaining proof holes or unsound shortcuts. The architecture therefore separates two concerns. The task-level adapter makes the proof-search procedure compatible with verified-coding benchmarks, where proof obligations are coupled to generated definitions and auxiliary facts. RecursiveWorker is the central inference mechanism: it treats a hard Lean obligation not as a single generation problem, but as a recursively structured search over smaller verified obligations. In more detail, the scaffold can be viewed as four interacting layers: 

Task adapter. The task adapter manages the global Lean artifact. It tracks the editable helper, definition, and theorem regions; constructs candidate files; and identifies unre-solved theorem or lemma obligations that require proof-level search. 

RecursiveWorker. The proof-search layer operates on individual theorem or lemma obliga-tions. It is responsible for direct proof attempts, recursive subgoal decomposition, local worker calls, and recombination of verified subproofs into the parent artifact. 

Verifier and tool layer. Lean provides the authoritative accept/reject signal. In addition, an optional MCP tool layer exposes structured interfaces for diagnostics, proof-state inspection, retrieval, and bounded candidate checks. These tools guide search, but do not replace final verification. 

Progress and guardrail layer. The scaffold applies deterministic checks and progress 90 evaluation at candidate boundaries. This layer enforces output format, preserves theorem signatures, rejects proof bypasses, and decides whether the system should continue, repair, decompose, promote, or stop. 

Figure 5.1: Overview of the verifier-in-the-loop scaffold for Lean verified coding. The task adapter manages sectioned VeriCoding artifacts, while RecursiveWorker performs recur-sive proof search over theorem and lemma obligations. Lean verification is the authoritative acceptance gate; the MCP tool layer provides auxiliary inspection and retrieval support. Figure 5.1 summarizes the overall architecture. The main design principle is that Lean verified coding is treated as adaptive proof search over a growing artifact, rather than as a single generation problem. Candidate files are checked repeatedly, and verifier feedback is routed either to the task-level adapter or to RecursiveWorker , depending on whether the failure concerns the global artifact or a local proof obligation. The following subsections unpack these layers. Section 5.2.1 describes Recursive-Worker ; Section 5.2.2 describes the verifier boundary and MCP tool layer; and Section 5.2.3 describes the progress and guardrail mechanisms used to control search. 91 5.2.1 Recursive Decomposition 

Figure 5.2: Recursive proof decomposition for Lean verified coding. Given a root theorem or lemma obligation, the scaffold first attempts a direct proof. If the direct attempt succeeds, the resulting proof can be accepted as a verified proof. If it fails, the system constructs a proof sketch containing named intermediate claims, which are promoted into standalone subgoals. Each subgoal is then solved independently: some subgoals verify directly, some require repair, and harder subgoals may be recursively decomposed into smaller obligations. Verified leaves are collected as reusable subproofs, while unsuccessful branches may be pruned. The verified subproofs are then recombined into a candidate proof of the parent obligation, which is finally checked by Lean to ensure that the recombined proof satisfies the original theorem statement. The core proof-search mechanism is recursive decomposition. Rather than asking one model call to synthesize a complete proof of a difficult Lean obligation, the system treats the obligation as a target that can be broken into smaller verified claims. This is useful because long Lean proofs often fail for local reasons: a missing intermediate fact, an incorrect tactic sequence, or a proof state that requires an auxiliary lemma before the final goal can be closed. Recursive decomposition makes this intermediate structure explicit. 92 Sketch-based decomposition. The procedure begins with a direct proof attempt. Given a theorem or lemma obligation, a worker first asks a formal prover model to generate a complete Lean proof. If this candidate verifies, the obligation is solved immediately. If it fails, the system switches to sketch-based decomposition. A reasoning model proposes a proof sketch containing named intermediate claims, typically expressed as have statements whose bodies are left unresolved. These claims serve as candidate subgoals: instead of solving the original theorem monolithically, the system extracts the intermediate claims as standalone proof obligations. 

Worker and sub-worker roles. Each extracted subgoal is then assigned to worker model calls. A worker may try to solve the subgoal directly, repair a failed subgoal proof using Lean diagnostics, or invoke the same decomposition procedure recursively if the subgoal remains too difficult. Thus the proof attempt induces a tree of obligations. The root is the original theorem, internal nodes are obligations that have been decomposed further, and leaves are either verified subproofs or failed branches. Recursion is bounded by depth limits and proof-attempt budgets, so decomposition does not become an unbounded proof exploration. 

Recombination. This is done explicitly. Once all required subgoals from a proof sketch have verified, their proofs are inserted back into the parent proof context. The system then reconstructs the parent theorem using the verified subproofs and reruns Lean on the combined artifact. This final check is necessary because subgoals that verify in isolation must still compose correctly with the parent proof, local names, imports, and surrounding definitions. A branch is accepted only when the recombined theorem verifies in context. This theorem-level decomposition is distinct from the task-level artifact management described in the previous section. The task adapter may construct or revise helper, definition, and theorem regions of a VeriCoding file, but RecursiveWorker is applied only to theorem and lemma obligations. In other words, recursive decomposition is a proof-search mechanism: 93 it solves formal obligations by introducing, proving, and recombining intermediate claims, while the outer scaffold is responsible for inserting the resulting proof back into the full verified-coding artifact. 

Termination. The procedure terminates when the root theorem verifies, when a required subgoal cannot be proved within the configured attempt budget, when the maximum recursion depth is reached, or when a global resource limit is exhausted. These termination conditions ensure that recursive decomposition can exploit additional inference-time structure without allowing failed branches to consume unbounded compute. 

# 5.2.2 Verification MCP and Tool Access 

Verifier boundary. Lean verification is the authoritative accept/reject path. A candidate artifact is accepted only if the required declarations elaborate and all proof obligations are discharged under the final no-bypass policy. The tool layer has a different role: it provides additional information to guide model calls. Tools may expose diagnostics, proof states, library search, or bounded candidate checks, but their outputs are still never acceptance evidence. 

MCP tool layer. We implement tool access through an MCP-style tool layer. MCP, or Model Context Protocol, provides a structured interface through which a model can call external tools rather than relying only on raw prompt text [102]. In practice, a tool-calling model emits typed requests to inspect a Lean file, query the current proof state, search for relevant declarations, or check a candidate snippet. The tool layer executes these requests against Lean-facing services and returns structured outputs such as diagnostics, local hypotheses, goal states, retrieved lemmas, or compact validity reports. The purpose of this layer is to make the formal environment queryable during proof search. It gives models access to information that would otherwise be implicit in Lean’s state or scattered across the library. 94 Tool categories. The tools exposed to the model fall into four broad categories. First, 

candidate-checking tools run bounded Lean checks on generated snippets or candidate files and return compact validity information. Second, diagnostic tools parse Lean errors and warnings into a form suitable for repair prompts. Third, proof-state tools expose local goals, hypotheses and types at a specified location in a materialized Lean file. Fourth, retrieval tools search over Mathlib (Lean Standard Library), local declarations, examples, or premise suggestions relevant to the current goal. These tools support recursive decomposition by helping workers prove subgoals, repair local failures, and identify facts needed for recombination. Table 5.1 summarizes the main tools and their subsequent classes exposed through the scaffold. 

Guardrails. The same boundary also supports guardrails. The system rejects candidates that change protected theorem signatures, leave unresolved proof holes, or use forbidden shortcuts such as sorry , admit , unsound axioms, or unsafe constructs. Intermediate stages may allow unresolved obligations when the scaffold is still constructing the artifact, but final acceptance always requires a complete Lean file with no proof bypasses. 

# 5.2.3 Progress Evaluation 

Partial progress under binary verification. Lean verification yields a binary accept/re-ject verdict, but inference need not be all-or-nothing. A failed candidate can still represent useful progress. It may close select proof holes, produce a valid helper lemma, repair a proof sketch, or move the error from a syntax failure to a smaller unsolved goal. Progress evaluation is the mechanism that uses these intermediate signals to decide what action the overall scaffold should take: should it continue repairing a branch, decompose it further, route information back to the task-level adapter, or stop the branch completely. 

Deterministic gates. The first layer consists of deterministic gates. These checks enforce a number of needed controls: output format, replacement counts, import hygiene, theorem-signature preservation, no-bypass constraints, Lean verification status, recursion-depth limits, 95 Tool class Representative tools Role in proof search        

> Candidate checking lean_check_candidate Runs a bounded Lean check on a candidate snippet or file and returns validity status with compact diagnostics. Diagnostics lean_diagnostic_messages ∗Extracts Lean errors and warnings from a ma-terialized file, including locations and repair-relevant messages. Proof-state inspection lean_goal ∗,
> lean_term_goal ∗,
> lean_hover_info ∗
> Exposes local goals, hypotheses, types, and hover information at a concrete file position. Retrieval / search lean_leansearch ∗,
> lean_loogle ∗,
> lean_leanfinder ∗,
> lean_leandex
> Searches Mathlib, local declarations, APIs, examples, signatures, and semantically related theorems. Premise search lean_state_search ∗,
> lean_hammer_premise ∗
> Suggests premises or automation-relevant facts for a concrete goal at a specified file position.

Table 5.1: Tool classes exposed through the MCP-style tool layer. Starred tools are drawn from the Lean LSP MCP interface [102]; unstarred tools are additional integrations used by the scaffold, such as LeanDex lookup and bounded candidate checking. All tools provide guidance for proof search, while final acceptance is determined only by Lean verification. and cost or call budgets. They serve to reject candidates that violate hard constraints and accept those that satisfy the final verification policy. 

Task-level evaluation. The second layer operates over the full VeriCoding artifact, at the task level. It is invoked when an iteration leaves unresolved obligations after constructing or revising the candidate file. Its inputs include the current Lean artifact, recent verifier diagnostics, the unresolved theorem or lemma blocks, and prior control decisions. Its role is to decide whether the task-level scaffold should continue, request additional helper theorems, revise generated definitions, or abandon the current trajectory. This lets local proof failures influence the overall file structure when the failure appears to depend on missing auxiliary facts or unsuitable definitions. 

Proof-level evaluation. The third layer operates inside RecursiveWorker , where it evaluates a single theorem, lemma, or subgoal branch during recursive proof search. Rather than judging the candidate in isolation, the evaluator can query the local Lean state through 96 Candidate artifact or proof branch 

Deterministic gates 

Progress evaluator 

Local continuation repair / tool use 

Structural revision sketch / decompose 

Escalation or pruning helper / def / abandon 

Figure 5.3: Progress-evaluation control flow. Deterministic gates first enforce hard constraints such as format validity, theorem-signature preservation, no-bypass checks, Lean verification status, and resource limits. If a candidate is not accepted or rejected outright, the progress evaluator chooses among three classes of response: local continuation, structural revision or further decomposition, and escalation or pruning. These classes group the concrete task-level and proof-level actions used by the scaffold. read-only tools: diagnostics, goal inspection, term-goal inspection, and hover/type information. These tool calls give the evaluator a more precise view of the current obligation, the latest proof candidate or sketch, and the surrounding local context. The evaluator then combines this local information with the branch history and decomposition tree to choose an action. 

Action space. The evaluators emit discrete control actions, determining which part of the scaffold should receive the next inference step. Some decisions keep the branch local, allowing further repair or tool-assisted proof search. Others change the proof structure, for example by revising the current proof sketch or recursively decomposing a difficult subgoal. A third class escalates the failure to the surrounding task-level scaffold or prunes the branch entirely. Figure 5.3 summarizes this control flow. 97 Control rationale. The purpose of this action space is to avoid treating all verifier failures as equivalent. Some failures are local: a malformed tactic or small type mismatch can remain within the repair loop. Others are structural: a plausible proof sketch may need to be revised, or a hard subgoal may need to be decomposed into smaller obligations. Still others indicate that the proof branch is blocked by the surrounding artifact, such as a missing helper lemma or an implementation choice that makes the specification difficult to prove. In those cases, the evaluator routes the failure upward rather than spending more budget on local repair. 

Budgeted termination. Progress evaluation also prevents unbounded search. Branches terminate when they exceed the configured repair budget, recursion depth, model-call budget, or cost budget, or when the evaluator determines that further repair is unlikely to help. Conversely, branches that show measurable progress can receive additional attempts. This gives the scaffold a budgeted notion of search as progress evaluation determines how inference-time compute is allocated before final verification. 

# 5.3 Experimental Setup 

The previous section described the architecture of our verifier-in-the-loop scaffold: a task-level adapter manages the global Lean artifact, while RecursiveWorker performs recursive proof search over individual theorem and lemma obligations. In this section, we describe how that scaffold is evaluated. The goal is to specify the task suites, experimental conditions, acceptance criteria, and measurement protocol used in the experiments. Our scaffold is built on an implemented HILBERT-style proof-search framework, which introduced recursive proof construction with Lean verification, proof sketching, subgoal de-composition, and recombination [39]. We therefore do not treat recursive proof decomposition itself as a novel component of this thesis. Instead, our contribution is to adapt and extend that proof-level worker into a verified- coding scaffold for sectioned Lean artifacts. Concretely, we add four pieces around the HILBERT-style worker. First, we add task-level 98 artifact management for VeriCoding tasks: the scaffold constructs, updates, and verifies Lean files within distinct helper, definition, and theorem regions, and promotes unresolved theorem or lemma obligations to RecursiveWorker . Second, we add stronger final no-bypass checks, so that a candidate is accepted only if the target signatures are preserved, all obligations are discharged, and the final artifact contains no proof holes or unsound shortcuts. Third, we add MCP-based tool access as specified in Section 5.2.2. Fourth, we implement a Proof Reviser agent as specified in Section 5.2.3, an additional model role. Within this terminology, RecursiveWorker refers only to the HILBERT-like proof-search component. The surrounding task adapter, verifier interface, MCP tool layer, no-bypass guardrails, Proof Reviser, and experiment runner are collectively referred to as our scaffold. 

# Task Suites 

We evaluate on three task suites. The first is a Vericoding pilot suite containing 26 Lean tasks. This suite was constructed from an initial base run: the baseline prover discharged the other candidate examples, and the remaining unsolved tasks were retained as a compact pilot set for evaluating scaffolded inference. Thus, the pilot suite is not intended to be a representative random sample of Vericoding, but rather a small residual set where direct one-shot proving was insufficient and verifier-guided search could provide additional signal. Each task consists of a natural-language description, a formal statement, and a Lean source file with editable regions. These regions include helper, definition, and theorem sections, and proof obligations are represented by missing proof terms (i.e., sorry ). The pilot suite is used as a small end-to-end evaluation setting for comparing direct repair, tool use, decomposition, and proof-reviser variants. The second suite is Verina, a larger VeriCoding-style dataset containing 189 Lean tasks. Verina uses the same general task schema as the pilot suite, but provides a broader evaluation distribution. We use the same scaffold interface, verification policy, and success criteria for both VeriCoding suites. This allows the pilot suite to serve as a smaller validation setting 99 before applying the same procedure to the larger Verina evaluation. The third suite is the Dalek prove-helpers worksheet sample. This benchmark is not treated as another VeriCoding split. Instead, it is a separate stress test for proof synthesis in a setting derived from systems-code verification. The benchmark is extracted from Lean specifications produced by Aeneas for the Rust curve25519-dalek crate. In this context, Aeneas is the translation layer that turns Rust code and its associated correctness obligations into Lean artifacts. The full extracted benchmark contains 190 self-contained Lean projects, each centered on a main correctness theorem. We evaluate a fixed sample of 30 tasks as a representative set and use the same sample across Dalek conditions. The Dalek worksheet format differs from the VeriCoding format. Each worksheet contains proof-only helper goals that must be solved before the main theorem can be completed. These helper goals are introduced as fresh obligations, while the original helper declarations in the surrounding source are redacted. A successful solution therefore cannot reuse the original helper proofs. It must instead prove the fresh helper goals in the submitted worksheet and then use those proved helpers to close the main target. This makes the Dalek sample a test of intermediate-lemma construction and proof composition, rather than only local proof-hole completion, more representative of a true formal verification task. 

# Verification Infrastructure 

Lean verification is authoritative in all experiments. For the VeriCoding suites, candidate artifacts are checked through Kimina, an implemented Lean 4 server that provides a scalable interface for Lean verification, diagnostics, and proof-state feedback [120]. Kimina supplies the verifier interface used by our scaffold. Intermediate checks may guide search while some obligations remain deferred, but final acceptance always requires a fresh verification of the completed artifact under the no-bypass policy. The tool layer described in Section 5.2.2 is used only as an aid to proof search. In tool-enabled conditions, the model may request structured information such as diagnostics, 100 local proof states, candidate-check results, or relevant declarations. These tool calls can help RecursiveWorker repair failed proofs, identify useful facts, or decide whether to decompose a goal further. They do not change the acceptance rule: a task is solved only when the final artifact is accepted by the relevant verifier or grader. For Dalek tasks, final acceptance is determined by the Dalek grader rather than by the VeriCoding verifier alone. The grader checks that the submitted worksheet builds, satisfies the syntactic restrictions, and proves the required main and helper targets without relying on forbidden axioms or redacted helper proofs. 

# Experimental Conditions 

The experiments compare direct generation, sampling-based baselines, and scaffold-based proof search. Across ablations, we hold fixed the task set, model family, provider, verifier configuration, prompt family, and attempt budget except for the factor being varied. This is important because formal proof generation is sensitive to inference budget, verifier feedback, and the availability of tool calls. The simplest baseline is one-shot generation. In this condition, the model receives the task prompt and produces a single Lean candidate. The candidate is checked after generation, but verifier feedback is not returned to the model during the attempt. This baseline measures how much of each task suite can be solved by direct synthesis alone. The second baseline is best-of-n sampling. The model produces multiple independent candidates under the same task prompt, and the first candidate that passes the verifier is accepted. This controls for additional sampling budget without adding structured repair, recursive decomposition, or progress-guided search. A tool-enabled variant gives each attempt bounded access to the Lean tool layer while preserving the same overall sampling budget. This isolates the effect of tool access from the effect of the scaffold’s proof-decomposition and repair procedure. We then evaluate ablations involving RecursiveWorker . In the recursive-without-tools 101 condition, RecursiveWorker can generate proof sketches, extract subgoals, prove subgoals recursively, and recombine verified subproofs, but it does not receive MCP tool access. This tests whether decomposition alone improves proof search. In the recursive-with-tools condition, bounded tool access is added during subgoal proving and correction. This tests whether proof-state inspection, diagnostics, and retrieval help the worker close extracted subgoals. The full scaffold condition combines ann the above with the Proof Reviser as detailed in Section 5.2.3. This condition represents the complete experimental system rather than a single isolated mechanism. Where a table reports only a subset of these ablations, we interpret comparisons only among conditions with matched task sets and matched budgets. The Dalek worksheet experiments are reported separately from the VeriCoding experiments. For Dalek, we compare a no-tools direct baseline against a tool-enabled baseline under the same worksheet sample and retry budget. These conditions use the Dalek grader as the final acceptance mechanism. We do not pool Dalek results with VeriCoding results, since the task format, grading procedure, and proof obligations differ. 

# Success Criteria 

For VeriCoding tasks, a task is counted as solved only if the final Lean artifact passes the configured final verification check. The target theorem or declaration signature must be preserved, and all proof obligations must be discharged. The final artifact must not contain unresolved proof holes or bypass constructs, including uses of sorry , admit , sorryAx ,arbitrary axioms, unsafe casts, external implementations, or other constructs that make the proof vacuous. A candidate that passes an intermediate check while leaving deferred obligations unresolved is not counted as a success. For Dalek worksheet tasks, a task is counted as solved only if the submitted worksheet passes the Dalek grader. The worksheet must build successfully, pass the syntactic anti-cheat checks, and satisfy the semantic axiom checks for the main theorem and all helper targets. The proof may rely only on the permitted base axioms of the Lean environment. It may 102 not rely on redacted helper proofs, hidden proof gaps, or any occurrence of sorryAx that might bypass the helper theorem proofs. Since the worksheet variant introduces fresh helper obligations, a successful submission must prove those helpers in the worksheet itself and use them to complete the main target. 

# Metrics 

The primary metric is task success rate, reported as the number of solved tasks divided by the number of attempted tasks for each condition. We report success rates separately for the VeriCoding pilot suite, Verina, and the Dalek worksheet sample. We also record efficiency and process metrics. These include total input and output tokens, estimated model cost, wall-clock time per task, the number of model calls, and the number of Lean verifier calls. For tool-enabled conditions, we record the number and type of tool calls. For conditions using RecursiveWorker , we additionally record the number of generated subgoals, the number of solved and failed subgoals, the maximum recursion depth reached, and the point at which proof search terminates. When the progress evaluator or proof-revision layer is active, we also record the distribution of its control decisions. Failures are bucketed for post-hoc analysis. VeriCoding failures may arise during non-theorem generation, direct proof search, subgoal extraction, recursive subgoal solving, recom-bination, final verification, or timeout. Dalek failures are categorized according to whether they arise from syntactic rejection, build failure, unauthorized axioms, unsolved helper goals, or failure to close the main theorem. These buckets are diagnostic only; they do not alter the binary success criterion. 

# Evaluation Controls 

The remaining role of the evaluation protocol is to ensure that comparisons are controlled and reproducible. For each condition, we use a fixed task manifest and fixed run configuration. In ablation comparisons, the task set, model, provider, verifier or grader, prompt family, 103 attempt budget, and token budget are held fixed; only the mechanism under evaluation is varied. In particular, comparisons between the recursive-with-tools condition and the full scaffold isolate the addition of the ProofReviser , since both conditions otherwise use the same RecursiveWorker , verifier feedback, and tool-access setting. We report VeriCoding and Dalek results separately rather than pooling them. The VeriCoding suites are evaluated through the Lean/Kimina final-verification pipeline, whereas the Dalek worksheet sample is evaluated through the Dalek grader. Because the task formats, acceptance checks, and proof obligations differ, aggregate success rates across these settings would not be interpretable as a single benchmark score. All model-facing API calls in the reported experiments are routed through OpenRouter using an OpenAI-compatible chat-completion interface. This includes calls made by the direct-generation baselines, the formal prover, reasoning or sketch-generation calls inside 

RecursiveWorker , tool-calling model roles, and the ProofReviser when it is enabled. Routing all model calls through the same provider interface standardizes authentication, request formatting, usage accounting, and model selection across experimental conditions. 

# 5.4 Results 

This section evaluates the inference-time verification scaffold on the Vericoding pilot set, VERINA, and Dalek. Unless otherwise noted, all methods in this section use the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model; the comparisons therefore isolate differences in inference-time control, tool use, decomposition, repair, and proof-reviser feedback rather than differences in the underlying model. The main results compare direct generation with repair, top-level tool use, the previous E5 scaffold, and the full scaffold with proof reviser under reported inference budgets. We then use the Vericoding pilot subset for more detailed configuration comparisons, since that subset has the most complete scaffold ablations. Finally we analyze tool use, cost–success trade-offs, and common failure modes. 104 Main Benchmark Results 

Table 5.2 reports the headline verification results for the Vericoding pilot set, VERINA, and Dalek. On the Vericoding pilot set, direct generation with five verifier-guided repairs solves 12 of 26 tasks (46.2%). Exposing only top-level tools does not improve this baseline in this run, solving 6 of 26 tasks (23.1%). The previous E5 scaffold solves 17 of 26 tasks (65.4%), while the strongest pilot result is the full scaffold with proof reviser, which solves 18 of 26 tasks (69.2%). Because these rows use the same base model, the improvement reflects the inference procedure: the higher-scoring methods structure search around decomposition, verifier feedback, repair, and proof-reviser checks rather than relying only on direct retry or outer-level tool access. The gain comes with a substantially larger inference budget. Direct repair uses far fewer model and verifier/tool calls than the full scaffold with proof reviser. Thus, the scaffold should be interpreted as a cost-sensitive search procedure: it improves verification success by spending additional structured inference budget, not by providing a cheaper single-pass method. Cost comparisons should also be treated cautiously for rows where provider spend was not fully captured; in those cases, call counts and token usage are more reliable than the reported dollar estimate. On VERINA broad, the direct repair baseline solves 117 of 187 tasks (62.6%). The top-level-tools-only variant solves 109 of 187 tasks (58.3%), indicating that simply allowing tool calls at the outer level does not improve pass rate in this setting. We also report a harder VERINA residual setting, consisting of tasks left unsolved by earlier direct-repair or top-level-tool baselines. On this residual subset, whole-task decomposition with tools and the proof reviser solves 7 of 42 tasks (16.7%). Because this subset is selected from previously unsolved tasks, the result should be interpreted as a stress test for the scaffold rather than as a broad VERINA pass rate. Dalek-Bench (Dalek Benchmark) provides a harder cross-benchmark stress test. On the 30-task Dalek-Bench subset, direct generation without Lean tools solves 3 of 30 tasks 105 (10.0%), while direct generation with Lean tools solves 5 of 30 tasks (16.7%). Thus, tool access provides a small improvement in this setting, but the overall solve rate remains low. The Hilbert-corrected recursive-decomposition scaffold solves 2 of 30 tasks ( 6.7% ), indicating that the scaffold gains observed on the Vericoding pilot set do not yet transfer cleanly to Dalek-Bench. The failure mode is not merely insufficient search depth: the recursive framework often spends substantial token and tool-call budget pursuing decompositions that do not produce repairable intermediate proof states. These results suggest that progress on Dalek-Bench will require more directed decomposition, stronger progress evaluation, and better task-specific tool-use policies rather than simply increasing recursive search budget. 

# Pilot-Subset Configuration Comparisons 

The Vericoding pilot set provides the cleanest setting for scaffold configuration comparisons because all runs share the same 26-task workload and the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model. The E1–E5 labels refer to successive configurations of the RecursiveWorker scaffold, not to different underlying models. These configurations vary how inference budget is allocated across decomposition, subgoal solving, repair, tool use, and progress evaluation. Table 5.3 summarizes these pilot-only ablations. The main pattern is that scaffold performance depends on how the search budget is structured, not only on how much budget is spent. E1 tests shallow decomposition without a strong repair loop and solves only 7 of 26 tasks. E2 adds repair to the shallow setting and doubles the solve count to 14, showing that verifier-guided retry is a major source of improvement. E3 makes decomposition recursive, but without enough effective repair or budget control, it underperforms E2 despite using more model calls. E4 increases the recursive budget and improves over E3, but at the highest historical cost, illustrating diminishing returns from expanding search alone. The E5 configurations improve the allocation of budget across decomposition, repair, and progress checks. The full E5 scaffold solves 17 of 26 tasks while using fewer calls and lower reported cost than the larger-budget E4 setting. The recursive-repair variant sacrifices one 106 Benchmark Method Solved Pass Model calls Verif./tool calls Cost Cost/ solve Vericoding pilot Direct + Repair 12 / 26 46.2% 159 109 $18.85 $1.57 Direct + Repair + Tools 6 / 26 23.1% 56 261 – –RecursiveWorker +Proof Reviser 18 / 26 69.2% 3,231 2,938 $132.69 $7.37 RecursiveWorker +Tools 17 / 26 65.4% 3,194 – $43.51 $2.56 VERINA broad Direct + Repair 117 / 187 62.6% 945 551 – –Direct + Repair + Tools 109 / 187 58.3% 435 1,314 - -VERINA hard RecursiveWorker +Tools + Proof Reviser 7 / 42 16.7% 7,354 10,363 $298.89 $42.70 Dalek-Bench (Subset 30) Direct + Repair 3 / 30 10.0% 142 142 $8.75 $2.92 Direct + Repair + Tools 5 / 30 16.7% 2,102 271 $207.53 $41.51 RecursiveWorker +Tools + Proof Reviser 2 / 30 6.7% 2,084 4,969 $127.51 $63.76 

Table 5.2: Headline verification results for the Vericoding pilot set, VERINA, and the Dalek Track C sample using the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model. The Vericoding pilot rows compare direct repair, top-level tool use, the previous E5 scaffold, and the full scaffold with proof reviser on the same 26-task pilot suite. E5 denotes the fifth configuration in the earlier scaffold-ablation series and serves as the prior full- scaffold reference point before adding the proof reviser; the full E1–E5 configuration series is reported separately in Table 5.3. The VERINA broad rows evaluate methods on the 187-task VERINA split used in this experiment. The VERINA hard row is evaluated only on tasks left unsolved by earlier direct-repair or top-level-tool baselines, so it should be read as a stress test for harder remaining examples rather than as an all- VERINA pass rate. The Dalek rows use a fixed 30-task Track C sample; the RecursiveWorker Dalek row is a live partial run and is marked with observed lower-bound calls and cost until the run finishes. Costs are reported run estimates when available; several Codex-backend rows did not fully capture provider spend, so cost comparisons should be interpreted together with model-call and verifier/tool-call counts. solved task but reduces cost, while the recursive-repair plus subgoal-tools variant recovers the 17-task solve count at the lowest reported cost among the 17-solve configurations. Finally, the newer full scaffold with proof reviser achieves the highest pilot solve count, 18 of 26, but with higher reported cost. This makes the proof-reviser variant an accuracy-oriented configuration rather than the most cost-efficient one. 107 Configuration Description Solved / n Pass Model calls Cost E1: shallow decomposition Tests whether a shallow decomposition scaffold is useful without a strong repair loop; low success despite moderate cost. 7 / 26 26.9% 4,204 $57.59 E2: shallow decomposition + repair Adds verifier-guided repair to shallow decomposition; substantially higher suc-cess, but higher cost. 14 / 26 53.8% 4,945 $97.58 E3: recursive decomposition Adds recursive decomposition; spends more calls than E2 but underperforms, suggesting that deeper decomposition alone is not sufficient. 11 / 26 42.3% 5,962 $101.65 E4: recursive decomposition + larger budget Expands the recursive search budget; improves over E3 but at the highest his-torical cost, showing diminishing returns from budget alone. 15 / 26 57.7% 8,775 $154.15 E5: full scaffold Balances decomposition, repair, and progress evaluation; improves solve count while using less budget than E4. 17 / 26 65.4% 5,104 $76.36 E5: recursive repair Shifts budget toward recursive repair; reduces cost and calls, with a small loss in solve count. 16 / 26 61.5% 3,327 $56.16 E5: recursive repair + subgoal tools Adds subgoal-level tool use; recovers the 17-task solve count with the lowest re-ported cost among the 17-solve settings. 17 / 26 65.4% 3,194 $43.51 Full scaffold + proof reviser Adds proof-reviser feedback but no tool access; achieves the highest solve count, but with higher reported cost. 18 / 26 69.2% 3,231 $132.69 

Table 5.3: Pilot-only configuration comparisons on the 26-task Vericoding pilot subset, using the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model. The E1–E5 rows compare successive RecursiveWorker scaffold configurations and show how performance changes as budget is allocated differently across shallow decomposition, recursive decomposition, repair, subgoal tools, and progress evaluation. The final row adds proof-reviser feedback and achieves the highest solve count, while the recursive-repair plus subgoal-tools variant is the most cost-efficient among the 17-solve configurations. These rows should be read as scaffold design trends rather than as an exhaustive hyperparameter sweep. 

# Tool Use and Cost–Success Trade-offs 

Figures 5.4 and 5.5 analyze how the scaffold spends its inference budget. The budget-efficiency curves show that the strongest pilot configuration reaches the highest solve count only after spending substantially more inference budget than direct repair. This reinforces the interpretation of the scaffold as a structured search procedure rather than a low-cost replacement for direct generation. 108 Figure 5.4: Budget-efficiency curves on the 26-task Vericoding pilot set. The left panel plots cumulative solved tasks against reported or token-backed dollar cost, omitting runs whose provider cost was not reliably captured. The right panel plots solved tasks against captured interactive tool calls and therefore includes only runs with nonzero tool-event logging. The full scaffold with proof reviser reaches the highest pilot solve count, but does so at higher reported spend, while tool-heavy configurations vary substantially in the amount of captured tool use required per additional solve. The tool-use diagnostics separate captured interactive tool calls from verifier or checker calls. This distinction is important because many runs use the verifier heavily without exposing additional interactive tools to the model. Tool access by itself is also not sufficient: the top-level-tools-only variants do not outperform direct repair, while the higher-performing scaffolded runs use tools inside a broader control loop involving decomposition, repair, and progress evaluation. 

# Failure Modes 

Figure 5.6 summarizes failed trajectories using heuristic buckets derived from trace errors, verifier diagnostics, proof-reviser decisions, and final Lean files. These buckets are intended as debugging signals rather than formal error labels. On the Vericoding pilot set, the full scaffold with proof reviser reduces the number of failures relative to direct repair and top-level tools, but the remaining failures are still concentrated in Hilbert-stage failures and proof 109 Figure 5.5: Captured interactive tool-call usage by benchmark family and tool group. The top row reports aggregate calls, grouped into search tools, run/diagnostic tools, and proof-reviser tools; the bottom row reports per-task non-reviser tool counts for solved and failed trajectories. Separating reviser calls prevents proof-reviser activity from being conflated with prover-side search. On the Vericoding pilot set, the historical subgoal-tools run is dominated by search calls, whereas the proof-reviser run records primarily reviser-side tool use. On VERINA, the whole-task decomposition run spends most of its captured tool budget on run/diagnostic calls. holes. This indicates that the scaffold improves search, but does not eliminate the need for correct helper definitions, proof structure, and theorem-level completion. The VERINA failures show the same broader pattern under a harder stress-test setting. Broad VERINA failures are dominated by Hilbert-stage failures, while the residual runs expose more cases involving proof holes, unproductive trajectories, or specification-related reviser decisions. These failures suggest that verifier feedback is useful only when the scaffold can convert it into a repairable intermediate state. When decomposition is poor, helper definitions are incomplete, or the progress evaluator misjudges a branch, the system can continue spending budget without reaching a verified solution. 110 Figure 5.6: Failure-mode diagnostics for the Vericoding pilot and VERINA runs. Bars group failed tasks into heuristic buckets inferred from trace errors, verifier diagnostics, proof-reviser decisions, and final Lean files. On the Vericoding pilot set, the full scaffold with proof reviser reduces the number of failures relative to direct repair and top-level tools, but still leaves Hilbert-stage and proof-hole failures. On VERINA, the broad direct-repair and top-level-tool baselines mostly fail in the Hilbert stage, while the hard residual whole-task run shifts some remaining failures toward proof holes or reviser-flagged trajectories. These buckets are debugging signals rather than formal, mutually exclusive error labels. 

# Qualitative Examples 

We include one successful trajectory and one representative failure to make the aggregate trends concrete. The successful trajectory is rustbench_array_concat . Direct repair and top-level tools both fail on this task, while the full scaffold with proof reviser verifies it. The verified artifact implements concatenation as a ++ b , then proves the postcondition by decomposing it into three smaller obligations: the size of the result, correctness of indices inherited from the left array, and correctness of indices inherited from the right array. The final theorem recombines these helper facts into the required postcondition, as shown in Listing 5.1.     

> 1def arrayConcat
> 2(a : Array Int) (b : Array Int)
> 3(h_precond : arrayConcat_precond a b) : Array Int :=
> 4a ++ b

111 56 theorem arrayConcat_spec_satisfied  

> 7

(a : Array Int) (b : Array Int)  

> 8

(h_precond : arrayConcat_precond a b) :  

> 9

arrayConcat_postcond a b  

> 10

(arrayConcat a b h_precond) h_precond := by  

> 11

simp only [arrayConcat_postcond, arrayConcat]  

> 12 13

have h_size :  

> 14

(a ++ b).size = a.size + b.size := by  

> 15

exact h_size_arrayConcat_spec_satisfied a b h_precond  

> 16 17

have h_left :  

> 18

∀ i : Nat, 0 ≤ i ∧ i < a.size → 

> 19

(a ++ b)[i]! = a[i]! := by  

> 20

exact h_left_arrayConcat_spec_satisfied  

> 21

a b h_precond h_left_bound h_left_index  

> 22 23

have h_right :  

> 24

∀ i : Nat, 0 ≤ i ∧ i < b.size → 

> 25

(a ++ b)[i + a.size]! = b[i]! := by  

> 26

exact h_right_arrayConcat_spec_satisfied  

> 27

a b h_precond h_right_bound h_right_rewrite  

> 28 29

exact And.intro h_size (And.intro h_left h_right) 

Listing 5.1: Excerpt from the successful rustbench_array_concat trajectory. The final theorem recombines separately proved helper facts for result size, left-side indexing, and right-side indexing. 112 This example illustrates the value of scaffolded search. The successful run is not merely a direct retry; it constructs a proof tree in which smaller verifier-checkable obligations are proved independently and then assembled into the final theorem. In this case, decomposition gives the model a useful proof structure that simpler baselines do not find. The representative failure is rustbench_remove_elements . In the full scaffold with proof reviser, the task fails before theorem repair can make useful progress. The generated non-theorem artifact still contains an incomplete implementation, and the postcondition includes a malformed indexed expression. In particular, the intended array access is passed as an argument without the parentheses needed for Lean to parse it correctly, as shown in Listing 5.2.  

> 1

def removeElements  

> 2

(a : Array Int) (b : Array Int)  

> 3

(h_precond : removeElements_precond a b) : Array Int :=  

> 4

sorry  

> 56

def removeElements_postcond  

> 7

(a : Array Int) (b : Array Int) (c : Array Int)  

> 8

(h_precond : removeElements_precond a b) : Prop :=  

> 9

(∀ k, k < c.size → inArray a c[k]! ∧ ¬ inArray b c[k]!) ∧ 

> 10

(∀ i j, i < j ∧ j < c.size → c[i]! ̸ = c[j]!)  

> 11 12

theorem removeElements_spec_satisfied  

> 13

(a : Array Int) (b : Array Int)  

> 14

(h_precond : removeElements_precond a b) :  

> 15

removeElements_postcond a b  

> 16

(removeElements a b h_precond) h_precond := by  

> 17

sorry 

Listing 5.2: Malformed candidate fragment from the failed rustbench_remove_elements 

113 trajectory. The implementation remains incomplete and the postcondition contains malformed indexed expressions such as inArray a c[k]! .Lean rejects this candidate during non-theorem validation with a syntax error:         

> 1Error message from Lean: unexpected token ’!’; expected ’)’, ’,’ or ’:’
> 23The error was encountered while trying to process the following lines:
> 4(∀k, k < c.size →inArray a c[k]! ∧ ¬ inArray b c[k]!) ∧

Listing 5.3: Validation error for the failed rustbench_remove_elements candidate. The contrast between these examples clarifies both what the scaffold contributes and where it remains brittle. In rustbench_array_concat , the scaffold turns a difficult postcondition into smaller obligations that can be proved and recombined. In rustbench_remove_elements ,the system fails earlier: the generated artifact is not yet a valid Lean object, so downstream theorem-level repair cannot act on a meaningful proof state. This motivates stronger whole-task validation, helper-region repair, and syntax-aware progress checks before allocating large budgets to proof search. 

# 5.5 Discussion and Future Work 

# 5.5.1 Discussion 

Tool access is not the same as tool use. A central result of this chapter is that simply exposing tools to the model is not sufficient, and can even reduce performance. On the Vericoding pilot set, direct repair solves 12 of 26 tasks, whereas the top-level-tools variant solves only 6 of 26. The same pattern appears on VERINA broad, where direct repair solves 117 of 187 tasks and top-level tools solve 109 of 187. Because these comparisons use the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model, the difference is not explained by model variance. Instead, it suggests that tool access introduces a larger action space and additional opportunities 114 for unproductive search unless tool calls are embedded in a control structure. The higher-performing runs are not the ones that merely expose tools, but the ones that decide when to decompose, when to repair, when to inspect verifier feedback, and when to stop. 

Verifier feedback as structured search. The strongest pilot result comes from the full scaffold with proof reviser, which solves 18 of 26 tasks. This improves over direct repair and over the previous E5 full-scaffold result, but the improvement should be interpreted as a property of the inference procedure rather than of the base model. The scaffold turns verifier feedback into structured search: failed attempts are not only retried, but routed through decomposition, subgoal attempts, progress checks, and proof-reviser feedback. This changes the role of the verifier from a terminal pass/fail oracle into an intermediate control signal. 

Cost-sensitive inference. The gains from scaffolded inference come with a substantially larger inference budget. Direct repair is much cheaper in model calls, verifier/tool calls, and reported cost, while the full scaffold with proof reviser spends many more calls to recover additional solved tasks. Thus, the scaffold should be viewed as a cost-sensitive search procedure rather than a lower-cost replacement for direct generation. This distinction matters for deployment: in high-value formal-verification settings, an additional verified task may justify many extra calls, but in latency- or budget-constrained settings, the relevant metric is cost per solve rather than pass rate alone. 

Benchmark variation and residual difficulty. The evaluation sets play different roles. The Vericoding pilot set provides a compact controlled workload for comparing scaffold configurations, while VERINA broad tests the same high-level methods on a larger split. The VERINA hard residual set is selected from tasks left unsolved by earlier baselines, so it acts as a stress test for the remaining tail of difficult examples. Dalek-Bench adds a different kind of stress test: it checks whether the recursive decomposition framework transfers to a distinct benchmark family. The low Dalek-Bench solve rates show that this transfer is not automatic. 115 In this setting, additional tools or deeper decomposition can consume substantial budget without reliably producing useful intermediate proof states, motivating more directed search and learned control. 

Remaining brittleness. The failure analysis shows that verifier feedback is useful only when the system can convert it into a repairable intermediate state. The scaffold still fails when decompositions are irrelevant, helper definitions are incomplete, proof holes remain in non-theorem regions, or the progress evaluator continues an unproductive branch. The qualitative failure on rustbench_remove_elements illustrates this problem: if the generated artifact is malformed before theorem proving begins, then downstream repair may spend budget without ever receiving a meaningful proof state. This motivates stronger whole-task validation and repair, not only better theorem-body search. 

Connection to Part I. Part I and Part II use verifier feedback in complementary ways. In Part I, the verifier supplies a reward signal used to update the policy. In Part II, the policy is fixed and the verifier guides inference-time search around it. These settings expose different design problems. RLVR depends on reward faithfulness, task filtering, and avoiding reward hacking. Scaffolded inference depends on control: deciding when to call tools, how to decompose, when to repair, and when to abandon a branch. In both cases, the verifier is powerful only when its feedback is made actionable by the surrounding training or inference environment. 

# 5.5.2 Future Work 

Learned progress evaluation. The current scaffold relies on progress judgments to decide whether to continue, repair, or abandon a branch. Future work could train a verifier-aware progress model from scaffold traces, using successful and failed trajectories to predict which partial states are likely to lead to verified solutions. This would make branch selection and 116 stopping decisions less heuristic and could reduce wasted budget on unproductive repair loops [30,121]. 

Trained revisers and value networks. The proof reviser in this work is still largely a prompted component. A natural next step is to replace or augment it with trained value networks and reviser models. A value network could estimate the probability that a partial proof state, candidate artifact, or search branch will eventually verify. A trained reviser could classify the failure type, identify which region of the artifact should be edited, and predict whether the next action should be repair, decomposition, retrieval, or abandonment. Such models could be trained from scaffold traces by labeling partial states according to eventual success, remaining proof depth, verifier-error type, or cost-to-solve. This would move the scaffold from hand-designed control rules toward learned verifier-guided search, closer in spirit to proof-progress prediction and reinforcement-guided formal reasoning systems [30,121]. 

Training tool use rather than prompting tool access. The negative top-level-tools result suggests that future systems should not only provide tools, but train the model to use them. Tool-use training could treat calls to the verifier, diagnostic inspector, retriever, proof-state viewer, or proof reviser as explicit actions. Successful scaffold traces could provide imitation data for when to call each tool and how to incorporate its output, while failed traces could provide negative examples of unproductive tool use. This connects to general tool-use methods such as ReAct and Toolformer, but the formal-verification setting provides a stronger supervision signal: tool outputs can be grounded in compiler errors, proof states, and final verification outcomes [101,122]. Lean-specific systems such as LeanDojo/ReProver and Lean Copilot also suggest that tool use, premise retrieval, and proof-environment interaction can be treated as trainable components rather than only as prompt-time affordances [123,124]. 

Task-specific model specialization. All main comparisons in this chapter use the same GPT-5.3 Codex base model in order to isolate scaffold effects, but future systems need not 117 use a single model for every decision. Different parts of the pipeline may benefit from different model capabilities. A large general model may be useful for high-level decomposition, while a smaller Lean-specialized model may be better for tactic selection, premise retrieval, syntax repair, or local proof completion. A router could assign subtasks to specialized models based on the current proof state, failure mode, or expected cost. This would turn the scaffold into a model portfolio rather than a single-model inference loop, potentially improving both pass rate and cost per solve. 

Whole-task repair and helper validation. The current scaffold still struggles when non-theorem regions are malformed or underspecified. Future work should extend repair beyond theorem bodies to the entire editable artifact: definitions, helper lemmas, specifications, imports, and theorem statements. A whole-task validation stage could check whether helper regions are syntactically valid, whether definitions match the intended specification, and whether generated lemmas are actually useful for the final proof. This would prevent the system from spending theorem-repair budget on artifacts that are not yet valid Lean objects or that lack the supporting structure needed for the final theorem. 

Adaptive inference budgets. The experiments show that additional search can improve pass rate, but not all tasks require the same amount of computation. Future scaffolds should allocate budget adaptively. Easy tasks could terminate after direct repair or shallow decomposition, while harder tasks receive deeper search, more repair attempts, richer retrieval, or proof-reviser intervention. A learned value model could also estimate the expected utility of additional computation, allowing the system to optimize cost per solve rather than raw pass rate alone. 

Combining training-time and inference-time verifier feedback. Finally, the two parts of this thesis suggest a combined direction. RLVR can train a policy to produce better formal artifacts, while scaffolded inference can generate structured traces of decomposition, 118 tool calls, repairs, and reviser decisions. Future work could train policies directly inside the scaffold: models would learn not only to produce final proofs, but also to choose tools, propose subgoals, interpret diagnostics, and decide when a branch is no longer worth pursuing. Conversely, scaffold traces could provide training data for RLVR or supervised fine-tuning, turning inference-time search behavior back into improvements in the underlying policy. 119 120 Conclusion 

This thesis asked whether the generation of formally verified code from written specifications can be automated with large language models (LLMs). Verified-code synthesis poses diffi-culties beyond automated theorem proving: specifications must be conceived alongside the implementation, the corpus of verified code is far smaller than the mathematical proof libraries that drive theorem-proving systems, and the space of valid solutions is less structured. Rather than committing to a single solution, the thesis studied two complementary approaches: post-training the model itself, and scaffolding a fixed model at inference time. Both were grounded in a concrete evaluation suite: the Vericoding Benchmark for broad cross-language coverage, and Dalek Bench, a new repository-grounded Lean benchmark constructed in this work from the curve25519-dalek-lean-verify project. Part I showed that post-training from Dafny verifier feedback can serve as an effective capability-distillation technique, but only when data quality, model capacity, and reward signal are jointly controlled. The central difficulty was not merely optimization, but reward design. The verifier deterministically checks the specification it is given, not the task that was intended, so the data distribution is itself part of the reward function. The initial single-turn run reached high aggregate reward, but rollout-level analysis revealed that much of this progress was specification hacking: trivial postconditions admitted constant implementations, leaked helper functions encoded the answer directly, and the staged reward paid partial credit for buildable code. Filtering the data toward faithful, low-leakage, nontrivial specifications made the signal honest but the task much harder, and a multi-turn verifier-feedback environment 121 partially recovered performance, reaching 31 .1% verification within a four-attempt repair budget on the hard subset. The broader lesson is that verifier feedback can train verified-code capability, but only when the reward and data are faithful enough to measure the intended task. Part II held the policy fixed and instead built a verifier-in-the-loop scaffold for Lean verified coding, combining recursive subgoal decomposition, an MCP-style tool layer, proof revision, and progress evaluation. The recurring finding was that tool access is not the same as tool use : naively exposing tools to the model reduced performance, while stronger configurations were those that directed when to decompose, repair, inspect feedback, and stop. Structured search consistently beat raw budget, with the full scaffold and proof reviser reaching the best pilot result of 18 of 26 tasks. The proof reviser was especially important as an efficient local-repair mechanism, recovering many failures without paying the full cost of recursive search. On VERINA, a broader set from the Vericoding benchmark, most solved tasks were handled by the simpler base-plus-reviser and reviser-plus-tools configurations; recursive decomposition’s distinctive contribution was not that more recursion was always better, but that it cracked a few hard tasks those configurations could not solve on their own. Dalek Bench remained considerably harder because success required recovering repository context: local library conventions, dependency structure, existing lemmas, naming patterns, and the surrounding proof architecture. This confirmed that repository-grounded proof repair is a brittle and more realistic task, and does not transfer automatically from standardized, mostly self-contained vericoding benchmarks. Recursive subgoal decomposition is only one loop within a broader scaffolding design space, and it is informative to place it alongside concurrent work by my peer Leo Yao, who explored a complementary point in that space for his master’s thesis. Rather than a single recursive worker, his approach samples many candidate agents in parallel, and rather than a wide array of tools, it equips those agents with a small set of well-informed ones. Qualitatively, his results point in the same direction as Part II while emphasizing a different axis of control: 122 parallel breadth is effective at surfacing promising candidates across VERINA and related benchmarks, but it buys that performance through additional sampling cost. By contrast, recursive decomposition targets the hard tail of tasks that require intermediate structure, while the proof reviser provides a cheaper local-repair loop for cases where full decomposition is unnecessary. Together, these systems suggest that effective scaffolding is not a matter of adding more calls, more tools, or more recursion indiscriminately. It depends on choosing the right control structure for the task. Tool selection matters more than tool breadth ; recursion helps when it creates useful intermediate obligations, but can be wasteful when local repair is sufficient; and progress evaluation is needed to decide which loop should run next. A natural next system would use breadth as a first pass, decomposition for the residual hard tasks, and a shared layer of curated tooling and progress evaluation to keep search efficient. Taken together, the two parts suggest that the path forward is not simply larger models, more samples, or more tools, but better mechanisms for converting verifier feedback into learning and search. At training time, verifier feedback is useful when it becomes a faithful capability-distillation signal. At inference time, verifier feedback is useful when it is embedded in a scaffold that actively structures tool use, repair, decomposition, and stopping decisions. The two approaches could ultimately reinforce each other. Scaffolds produce the supervision that training needs: examples of when to decompose a task, which tools to call, how to repair failed proofs, and when to stop. Training can then turn those traces into model behavior, making future scaffolds cheaper, more automatic, and less dependent on hand-designed control. This thesis does not close the gap between written specifications and verified code, but it crystallizes several techniques for narrowing it. That gap matters: as AI-generated code is written and deployed at a scale that outpaces human review, machine-checkable verification is one of the few safeguards that scales with it, and getting language models to produce verified artifacts reliably is a problem worth continuing to attack from both of the proposed directions. 123 124 References 

[1] Detecting and countering misuse of AI: August 2025 . en. url : https://www.anthropic. com/news/detecting-countering-misuse-aug-2025?utm_source=chatgpt.com (visited on 04/30/2026). [2] SentinelOne. How SentinelOne’s AI EDR Autonomously Discovered and Stopped Anthropic’s Claude from Executing a Zero Day Supply Chain Attack, Globally . en. Mar. 2026. url : https://www.sentinelone.com/blog/how-sentinelones-ai-edr-autonomously-discovered-and-stopped-anthropics-claude-from-executing-a-zero-day-supply-chain-attack-globally/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [3] How We Hacked McKinsey’s AI Platform . en. url : https://codewall.ai/blog/how-we-hacked-mckinseys-ai-platform (visited on 05/05/2026). [4] AI vs AI: How Our AI Agent Hacked a $20M-Funded AI Recruiter . en. url : https: //codewall.ai/blog/ai-vs-ai-how-our-ai-agent-hacked-a-20m-funded-ai-recruiter (visited on 05/05/2026). [5] How We Hacked Bain’s Competitive Intelligence Platform . en. url : https://codewall.ai/ blog/how-we-hacked-bains-competitive-intelligence-platform (visited on 05/05/2026). [6] Cost of a data breach 2025 | IBM . en. url : https://www.ibm.com/reports/data-breach (visited on 05/05/2026). [7] K. O’Flaherty. CrowdStrike Reveals What Happened, Why—And What’s Changed . en. Section: Cybersecurity. url : https://www.forbes.com/sites/kateoflahertyuk/2024/ 125 08/07/crowdstrike- reveals- what- happened- why- and- whats- changed/ (visited on 12/18/2025). [8] S. Janardhan. More details about the October 4 outage . en-US. Oct. 2021. url :https://engineering.fb.com/2021/10/05/networking-traffic/outage-details/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [9] “Amazon’s cloud unit hit by outage involving AI tools in December.” en. Reuters ,Feb. 2026. url : https://www.reuters.com/business/retail-consumer/amazons-cloud-unit-hit-by-least-two-outages-involving-ai-tools-ft-says-2026-02-20/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [10] C. A. R. Hoare. “An axiomatic basis for computer programming.” Commun. ACM ,

12 (10), Oct. 1969, pp. 576–580. issn : 0001-0782. doi : 10.1145/363235.363259. url :https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/363235.363259 (visited on 05/05/2026). [11] About The Rocq Prover . en. url : https : / / rocq - prover . org / about (visited on 05/20/2026). [12] L. de Moura and S. Ullrich. “The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and Programming Language (System Description).” en. [13] R. Gauci. Dafny: Statically Verifying Functional Correctness . arXiv:1412.4395 [cs]. Dec. 2014. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1412.4395. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.4395 (visited on 12/18/2025). [14] N. Swamy et al. “Dependent types and multi-monadic effects in F*.” en. In: Pro-ceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages . St. Petersburg FL USA: ACM, Jan. 2016, pp. 256–270. isbn :978-1-4503-3549-2. doi : 10.1145/2837614.2837655. url : https://dl.acm.org/doi/10. 1145/2837614.2837655 (visited on 05/05/2026). 126 [15] A. Lattuada, T. Hance, C. Cho, M. Brun, I. Subasinghe, Y. Zhou, J. Howell, B. Parno, and C. Hawblitzel. Verus: Verifying Rust Programs using Linear Ghost Types (extended version) . arXiv:2303.05491 [cs]. Mar. 2023. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.2303.05491. url :http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.05491 (visited on 12/18/2025). [16] J. W. Cutler et al. Cedar: A New Language for Expressive, Fast, Safe, and Analyzable Authorization (Extended Version) . arXiv:2403.04651 [cs]. Mar. 2024. doi : 10.48550/ arXiv.2403.04651. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04651 (visited on 05/05/2026). [17] X. Sun et al. “Anvil: Verifying Liveness of Cluster Management Controllers.” en. In: 2024, pp. 649–666. isbn : 978-1-939133-40-3. url : https://www.usenix.org/conference/ osdi24/presentation/sun-xudong (visited on 05/05/2026). [18] Z. Zhou, Anjali, W. Chen, S. Gong, C. Hawblitzel, and W. Cui. “VeriSMo: A Verified Security Module for Confidential VMs.” en. In: 2024, pp. 599–614. isbn : 978-1-939133-40-3. url : https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi24/presentation/zhou (visited on 05/05/2026). [19] T. mathlib Community. “The lean mathematical library.” In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs .POPL ’20. ACM, Jan. 2020, pp. 367–381. doi : 10 . 1145 / 3372885 . 3373824. url :http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3372885.3373824. [20] Lean Prover Community. Liquid Tensor Experiment . Lean formalization of the main theorem of liquid vector spaces, completed July 2022 in response to Peter Scholze’s challenge. GitHub, 2022. url : https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid (visited on 05/04/2026). [21] T. Tao and PFR formalization contributors. The Polynomial Freiman–Ruzsa Conjec-ture: A digitisation of the proof in Lean 4 . 2023. url : https://teorth.github.io/pfr/ (visited on 05/04/2026). 127 [22] A Lean companion to “Analysis I” | What’s new . url : https://terrytao.wordpress. com/2025/05/31/a-lean-companion-to-analysis-i/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [23] xenaproject. Formalization of Erdős problems . en. Dec. 2025. url : https://xenaproject. wordpress.com/2025/12/05/formalization-of-erdos-problems/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [24] xenaproject. Beyond the Liquid Tensor Experiment . en. Sept. 2022. url : https : //xenaproject.wordpress.com/2022/09/12/beyond-the-liquid-tensor-experiment/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [25] G. Klein et al. “seL4: formal verification of an OS kernel.” In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd symposium on Operating systems principles . SOSP09. ACM, Oct. 2009, pp. 207–220. doi : 10.1145/1629575.1629596. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1629575. 1629596. [26] Anthropic. Claude Code: Anthropic’s agentic coding system . Anthropic, 2025. url :https://www.anthropic.com/product/claude-code (visited on 05/04/2026). [27] Introducing OpenAI o3 and o4-mini | OpenAI . url : https://openai.com/index/ introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/ (visited on 05/05/2026). [28] Project Glasswing: Securing critical software for the AI era . en. url : https://www. anthropic.com/glasswing (visited on 05/05/2026). [29] Our evaluation of Claude Mythos Preview’s cyber capabilities | AISI Work . url :https://www.aisi.gov.uk/blog/our-evaluation-of-claude-mythos-previews-cyber-capabilities (visited on 05/05/2026). [30] T. Hubert et al. “Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning.” Nature , 651 (8106), Nov. 2025, pp. 607–613. issn : 1476-4687. doi : 10.1038/ s41586-025-09833-y. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09833-y. [31] T. Achim et al. “Aristotle: IMO-level Automated Theorem Proving.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2510.01346. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01346. 128 [32] H. Xin, D. Guo, Z. Shao, Z. Ren, Q. Zhu, B. Liu, C. Ruan, W. Li, and X. Liang. 

DeepSeek-Prover: Advancing Theorem Proving in LLMs through Large-Scale Synthetic Data . arXiv:2405.14333 [cs]. May 2024. doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2405 . 14333. url :http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14333 (visited on 12/17/2025). [33] Y. Lin et al. Goedel-Prover: A Frontier Model for Open-Source Automated Theorem Proving . arXiv:2502.07640 [cs]. Apr. 2025. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.2502.07640. url :http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07640 (visited on 12/17/2025). [34] L. Chen et al. “Seed-Prover: Deep and Broad Reasoning for Automated Theorem Proving.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2507.23726. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23726. [35] AlphaProof — DeepMind, 2024 (blog + Nature 2025) . auto-extract failed; link: https://deepmind.google/blog/ai-solves-imo-problems-at-silver-medal-level/. [36] Z. Z. Ren et al. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing Formal Mathematical Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning for Subgoal Decomposition . arXiv:2504.21801 [cs]. July 2025. 

doi : 10.48550/arXiv.2504.21801. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21801 (visited on 12/17/2025). [37] S. Bursuc et al. A benchmark for vericoding: formally verified program synthesis . 2025. 

doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2509.22908. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22908. [38] Beneficial AI Foundation. dalek-lite: A pure-Rust implementation of group operations on Ristretto and Curve25519 . Verus proofs over a fork of curve25519-dalek . GitHub, 2025. url : https://github.com/Beneficial- AI- Foundation/dalek- lite (visited on 05/04/2026). [39] S. Varambally, T. Voice, Y. Sun, Z. Chen, R. Yu, and K. Ye. Hilbert: Recursively Building Formal Proofs with Informal Reasoning . 2025. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2509. 22819. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22819. 129 [40] K. R. M. Leino. “Dafny: An Automatic Program Verifier for Functional Correctness.” In: Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 348–370. isbn : 9783642175114. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-17511-4_20. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17511-4_20. [41] Dafny Documentation . en. url : https://dafny-lang.github.io/dafny/latest/DafnyRef/ DafnyRef.html (visited on 05/20/2026). [42] L. de Moura, S. Kong, J. Avigad, F. van Doorn, and J. von Raumer. “The Lean Theorem Prover (System Description).” In: Automated Deduction - CADE-25 . Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 378–388. isbn : 9783319214016. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-21401-6_26. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21401-6_26. [43] Isabelle/HOL . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002. isbn : 9783540459491. doi : 10.1007/3-540-45949-9. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45949-9. [44] T. Gauthier, C. Kaliszyk, J. Urban, R. Kumar, and M. Norrish. “TacticToe: Learn-ing to Prove with Tactics.” Journal of Automated Reasoning , 65 (2), Feb. 2021. arXiv:1804.00596 [cs.AI], pp. 257–286. issn : 0168-7433, 1573-0670. doi : 10.1007/ s10817-020-09580-x. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.00596 (visited on 05/28/2026). [45] K. Yang and J. Deng. Learning to Prove Theorems via Interacting with Proof Assistants .arXiv:1905.09381 [cs.LO]. May 2019. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1905.09381. url : http: //arxiv.org/abs/1905.09381 (visited on 05/28/2026). [46] L. Blaauwbroek, J. Urban, and H. Geuvers. “The Tactician (extended version): A Seam-less, Interactive Tactic Learner and Prover for Coq.” In: vol. 12236. arXiv:2008.00120 [cs.AI]. 2020, pp. 271–277. doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 53518 - 6 _ 17. url : http : //arxiv.org/abs/2008.00120 (visited on 05/28/2026). [47] S. Polu and I. Sutskever. “Generative Language Modeling for Automated Theorem Proving.” arXiv.org , 2020. arXiv: 2009.03393. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03393. 130 [48] J. M. Han, J. M. Rute, Y. Wu, E. W. Ayers, and S. Polu. “Proof Artifact Co-training for Theorem Proving with Language Models.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. arXiv: 2102.06203. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06203. [49] S. Polu, J. M. Han, K. Zheng, M. Baksys, I. Babuschkin, and I. Sutskever. “Formal Mathematics Statement Curriculum Learning.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. arXiv: 2202.01344. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.01344. [50] G. Lample, M. Lachaux, T. Lavril, X. Martinet, A. Hayat, G. Ebner, A. Rodriguez, and T. Lacroix. “HyperTree Proof Search for Neural Theorem Proving.” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. arXiv: 2205.11491. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11491. [51] K. Yang, A. M. Swope, A. Gu, R. Chalamala, P. Song, S. Yu, S. Godil, R. Prenger, and A. Anandkumar. LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models . 2023. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2306.15626. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2306. 15626. [52] K. Zheng, J. M. Han, and S. Polu. “MiniF2F: a cross-system benchmark for formal Olympiad-level mathematics.” International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. arXiv: 2109.00110. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.00110. [53] Z. Azerbayev, H. Schoelkopf, K. Paster, M. D. Santos, S. McAleer, A. Q. Jiang, J. Deng, S. Biderman, and S. Welleck. “Llemma: An Open Language Model For Mathematics.” 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. arXiv: 2310.10631. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10631. [54] H. Lin, Z. Sun, Y. Yang, and S. Welleck. “Lean-STaR: Learning to Interleave Thinking and Proving.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. arXiv: 2407.10040. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10040. [55] H. Xin et al. DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5: Harnessing Proof Assistant Feedback for Rein-forcement Learning and Monte-Carlo Tree Search . arXiv:2408.08152 [cs]. Aug. 2024. 131 doi : 10.48550/arXiv.2408.08152. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08152 (visited on 05/05/2026). [56] Y. Lin et al. Goedel-Prover-V2: Scaling Formal Theorem Proving with Scaffolded Data Synthesis and Self-Correction . arXiv:2508.03613 [cs]. Aug. 2025. doi : 10.48550/arXiv. 2508.03613. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03613 (visited on 12/17/2025). [57] H. Wang et al. “Kimina-Prover Preview: Towards Large Formal Reasoning Models with Reinforcement Learning.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2504.11354. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2504.11354. [58] A. Ospanov, F. Farnia, and R. Yousefzadeh. “miniF2F-Lean Revisited: Reviewing Limitations and Charting a Path Forward.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2511.03108. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03108. [59] A. Poiroux, A. Bosselut, and V. Kuncak. “RLMEval: Evaluating Research-Level Neural Theorem Proving.” Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,2025. arXiv: 2510.25427. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25427. [60] Z. Ye, Z. Yan, J. He, T. Kasriel, K. Yang, and D. Song. “VERINA: Benchmarking Verifiable Code Generation.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2505.23135. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2505.23135. [61] CLEVER + VERINA — 2025 (Lean end-to-end vericoding benchmarks) . auto-extract failed; link: [62] C. Loughridge, Q. Sun, S. Ahrenbach, F. Cassano, C. Sun, Y. Sheng, A. Mudide, M. R. H. Misu, N. Amin, and M. Tegmark. DafnyBench: A Benchmark for Formal Software Verification . 2024. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.08467. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2406.08467. [63] M. R. H. Misu, C. V. Lopes, I. Ma, and J. Noble. “Towards AI-Assisted Synthesis of Verified Dafny Methods.” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 1(FSE), 132 2024, pp. 812–835. issn : 2994-970X. doi : 10.1145/3643763. url : http://dx.doi.org/10. 1145/3643763. [64] E. Mugnier, E. A. Gonzalez, N. Polikarpova, R. Jhala, and Z. Yuanyuan. “Laurel: Unblocking Automated Verification with Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 9(OOPSLA1), Apr. 2025, pp. 1519–1545. issn :2475-1421. doi : 10.1145/3720499. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3720499. [65] C. Sun, Y. Sheng, O. Padon, and C. W. Barrett. “Clover: Closed-Loop Verifiable Code Generation.” SAIV , 2023. arXiv: 2310.17807. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17807. [66] S. Chakraborty, G. Ebner, S. Bhat, S. Fakhoury, S. Fatima, S. K. Lahiri, and N. Swamy. “Towards Neural Synthesis for SMT-Assisted Proof-Oriented Programming.” 

International Conference on Software Engineering , 2024. arXiv: 2405.01787. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01787. [67] D. Zhang, J. Wang, and T. Sun. “Building A Proof-Oriented Programmer That Is 64% Better Than GPT-4o Under Data Scarcity.” In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 . Ed. by W. Che, J. Nabende, E. Shutova, and M. T. Pilehvar. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2025, pp. 23101–23118. isbn : 979-8-89176-256-5. doi : 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1186. 

url : https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.1186/. [68] R. Jain, S. Barke, G. Ebner, M. R. H. Misu, S. Lu, and S. Fakhoury. “What’s in a Proof? Analyzing Expert Proof-Writing Processes in F* and Verus.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2508.02733. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02733. [69] K. Thompson, N. Saavedra, P. Carrott, K. Fisher, A. Sanchez-Stern, Y. Brun, J. F. Ferreira, S. Lerner, and E. First. “Rango: Adaptive Retrieval-Augmented Proving for Automated Software Verification.” In: 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, Apr. 2025, pp. 347–359. doi : 10 . 1109 / icse55347.2025.00161. url : http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00161. 133 [70] C. Yang et al. “AutoVerus: Automated Proof Generation for Rust Code.” Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 2024. arXiv: 2409.13082. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13082. [71] T. Chen et al. “Automated Proof Generation for Rust Code via Self-Evolution.” 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. arXiv: 2410.15756. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.15756. [72] C. Sun, Y. Sun, D. Amrollahi, E. Zhang, S. K. Lahiri, S. Lu, D. Dill, and C. W. Barrett. “VeriStruct: AI-assisted Automated Verification of Data-Structure Modules in Verus.” 

arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2510.25015. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25015. [73] J. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, R. Caridad, Y. Yuan, J. Yao, S. Lu, and K. Pei. “ExVerus: Verus Proof Repair via Counterexample Reasoning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25810 ,2026. arXiv: 2603.25810. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.25810. [74] M. Lu, B. Delaware, and T. Zhang. “Proof Automation with Large Language Models.” 

International Conference on Automated Software Engineering , 2024. arXiv: 2409.14274. 

url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14274. [75] Z. Li, Z. Yang, D. He, H. Zhao, A. Zhao, S. Tang, K. Yang, A. Gupta, Z. Su, and C. Jin. “Goedel-Code-Prover: Hierarchical Proof Search for Open State-of-the-Art Code Verification.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19329 , 2026. arXiv: 2603.19329. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.19329. [76] L. Aniva, C. Sun, B. Miranda, C. Barrett, and S. Koyejo. Pantograph: A Machine-to-Machine Interaction Interface for Advanced Theorem Proving, High Level Reasoning, and Data Extraction in Lean 4 . 2024. doi : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2410 . 16429. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16429. [77] Y. Wu, A. Q. Jiang, W. Li, M. Rabe, C. Staats, M. Jamnik, and C. Szegedy. “Auto-formalization with Large Language Models.” Neural Information Processing Systems ,2022. arXiv: 2205.12615. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12615. 134 [78] A. Q. Jiang, S. Welleck, J. Zhou, W. Li, J. Liu, M. Jamnik, T. Lacroix, Y. Wu, and G. Lample. “Draft, Sketch, and Prove: Guiding Formal Theorem Provers with Informal Proofs.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. arXiv: 2210.12283. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.12283. [79] J. P. Zhou, C. Staats, W. Li, C. Szegedy, K. Q. Weinberger, and Y. Wu. “Don’t Trust: Verify - Grounding LLM Quantitative Reasoning with Autoformalization.” 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. arXiv: 2403.18120. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18120. [80] H. Ying, Z. Wu, Y. Geng, J. Wang, D. Lin, and K. Chen. “Lean Workbook: A large-scale Lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems.” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. arXiv: 2406.03847. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2406.03847. [81] Z. Azerbayev, B. Piotrowski, H. Schoelkopf, E. W. Ayers, D. R. Radev, and J. Avigad. “ProofNet: Autoformalizing and Formally Proving Undergraduate-Level Mathematics.” 

arXiv.org , 2023. arXiv: 2302.12433. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12433. [82] G. Chen, J. Wu, X. Chen, W. Zhao, R. Song, C. Li, K. Fan, D. Liu, and M. Liao. “Re-Form: Reflective Autoformalization with Prospective Bounded Sequence Optimization.” 

arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2510.24592. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24592. [83] A. Gu, B. Piotrowski, F. Gloeckle, K. Yang, and A. H. Markosyan. “ProofOpti-mizer: Training Language Models to Simplify Proofs without Human Demonstrations.” 

arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2510.15700. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15700. [84] A. Kamath, A. Senthilnathan, S. Chakraborty, P. Deligiannis, S. K. Lahiri, A. Lal, A. Rastogi, S. Roy, and R. Sharma. “Finding Inductive Loop Invariants using Large Language Models.” arXiv.org , 2023. arXiv: 2311.07948. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2311.07948. [85] SpecGen — Ma, Liu, Li, Xie, Bu, 2025, ICSE . auto-extract failed; link: arXiv. 135 [86] C. Wen, J. Cao, J. Su, Z. Xu, S. Qin, M. He, H. Li, S. Cheung, and C. Tian. “Enchanting Program Specification Synthesis by Large Language Models using Static Analysis and Program Verification.” International Conference on Computer Aided Verification ,2024. arXiv: 2404.00762. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00762. [87] J. P. Faria, E. Trigo, V. Honorato, and R. Abreu. “Automatic Generation of Formal Specification and Verification Annotations Using LLMs and Test Oracles.” arXiv.org ,2026. arXiv: 2601.12845. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.12845. [88] Á. F. Silva, A. Mendes, and R. Martins. “Inferring multiple helper Dafny assertions with LLMs.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2511.00125. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00125. [89] G. Tsoukalas, J. Lee, J. Jennings, J. Xin, M. Ding, M. Jennings, A. Thakur, and S. Chaudhuri. PutnamBench: Evaluating Neural Theorem-Provers on the Putnam Mathematical Competition . 2024. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2407.11214. url : https: //arxiv.org/abs/2407.11214. [90] E. Mugnier, E. A. Gonzalez, R. Jhala, N. Polikarpova, and Y. Zhou. Laurel: Unblocking Automated Verification with Large Language Models . arXiv:2405.16792 [cs.LO]. Mar. 2025. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.2405.16792. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16792 (visited on 05/20/2026). [91] Beneficial-AI-Foundation/curve25519-dalek-lean-verify . original-date: 2025-10-15T13:22:09Z. May 2026. url : https://github.com/Beneficial-AI-Foundation/curve25519-dalek-lean-verify (visited on 05/20/2026). [92] L. Ouyang et al. “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.” 

Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. arXiv: 2203.02155. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2203.02155. [93] N. Lambert et al. “TÜLU 3: Pushing Frontiers in Open Language Model Post-Training.” 

arXiv.org , 2024. arXiv: 2411.15124. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15124. 136 [94] DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning . 2025. doi : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2501 . 12948. url : https : //arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948. [95] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. “Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms.” arXiv.org , 2017. arXiv: 1707.06347. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/1707.06347. [96] Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. - M. Song, M. Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and D. Guo. “DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models.” arXiv.org , 2024. arXiv: 2402.03300. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300. [97] Q. Yu et al. “DAPO: An Open-Source LLM Reinforcement Learning System at Scale.” 

arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2503.14476. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14476. [98] C. Loughridge, Q. Sun, S. Ahrenbach, F. Cassano, C. Sun, Y. Sheng, A. Mudide, M. R. H. Misu, N. Amin, and M. Tegmark. “DafnyBench: A Benchmark for Formal Software Verification.” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2024. arXiv: 2406 . 08467. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08467. [99] C. Yan et al. “Re:Form - Reducing Human Priors in Scalable Formal Software Veri-fication with RL in LLMs: A Preliminary Study on Dafny.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2507.16331. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16331. [100] G. Sheng, C. Zhang, Z. Ye, X. Wu, W. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Peng, H. Lin, and C. Wu. “HybridFlow: A Flexible and Efficient RLHF Framework.” In: Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems . arXiv:2409.19256 [cs.LG]. Mar. 2025, pp. 1279–1297. doi : 10.1145/3689031.3696075. url : http://arxiv.org/abs/2409. 19256 (visited on 05/21/2026). [101] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models . 2022. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV. 2210.03629. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629. 137 [102] O. Dressler. Lean LSP MCP: Tools for agentic interaction with the Lean theorem prover . Mar. 2025. url : https://github.com/oOo0oOo/lean- lsp- mcp (visited on 05/04/2026). [103] A. Madaan et al. “Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback.” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. arXiv: 2303.17651. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2303.17651. [104] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, B. Labash, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. “Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. arXiv: 2303.11366. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. [105] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston. “Curriculum learning.” In: 

Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning . ICML ’09. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, June 2009, pp. 41–48. 

isbn : 978-1-60558-516-1. doi : 10.1145/1553374.1553380. url : https://dl.acm.org/doi/ 10.1145/1553374.1553380 (visited on 05/21/2026). [106] T. Matiisen, A. Oliver, T. Cohen, and J. Schulman. Teacher-Student Curriculum Learning . en. July 2017. url : https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1707 . 00183v2 (visited on 05/21/2026). [107] E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, and N. D. Goodman. “STaR: Bootstrapping Reasoning With Reasoning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14465 , 2022. arXiv: 2203.14465. url : https: //arxiv.org/abs/2203.14465. [108] Z. Z. Ren et al. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing Formal Mathematical Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning for Subgoal Decomposition . 2025. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2504. 21801. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21801. [109] Y. Lin et al. Goedel-Prover-V2: Scaling Formal Theorem Proving with Scaffolded Data Synthesis and Self-Correction . 2025. doi : 10.48550/ARXIV.2508.03613. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03613. 138 [110] X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Schärli, and D. Zhou. “Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. arXiv: 2304.05128. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128. [111] J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. A. Lieret, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press. “SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering.” 

Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. arXiv: 2405.15793. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2405.15793. [112] T. Ridnik, D. Kredo, and I. Friedman. “Code Generation with AlphaCodium: From Prompt Engineering to Flow Engineering.” arXiv.org , 2024. arXiv: 2401.08500. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08500. [113] A. Thakur, G. Tsoukalas, Y. Wen, J. Xin, and S. Chaudhuri. “An In-Context Learning Agent for Formal Theorem-Proving.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04353 , 2023. arXiv: 2310.04353. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04353. [114] H. Lightman, V. Kosaraju, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, B. Baker, T. Lee, J. Leike, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and K. Cobbe. “Let’s Verify Step by Step.” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. arXiv: 2305.20050. url : https://arxiv. org/abs/2305.20050. [115] C. Snell, J. Lee, K. Xu, and A. Kumar. “Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute Optimally can be More Effective than Scaling Model Parameters.” arXiv.org , 2024. arXiv: 2408. 03314. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03314. [116] J. Liu et al. Numina-Lean-Agent: An Open and General Agentic Reasoning System for Formal Mathematics . 2026. doi : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2601 . 14027. url : https : //arxiv.org/abs/2601.14027. [117] math-inc/OpenGauss . original-date: 2026-03-19T15:42:02Z. May 2026. url : https: //github.com/math-inc/OpenGauss (visited on 05/14/2026). 139 [118] M. D. Tredici, J. McCarran, B. Breen, J. A. Mijares, W. Yin, J. Taylor, F. Koppens, and D. Englund. “Ax-Prover: A Deep Reasoning Agentic Framework for Theorem Proving in Mathematics and Quantum Physics.” arXiv.org , 2025. arXiv: 2510.12787. 

url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.12787. [119] AxiomMath/Putnam2025 . original-date: 2025-12-20T05:40:47Z. May 2026. url : https: //github.com/AxiomMath/Putnam2025 (visited on 05/14/2026). [120] M. D. Santos, H. de Saxcé, H. Wang, R. Wang, M. Baksys, M. Unsal, J. Liu, Z. Liu, and J. Li. Kimina Lean Server: A High-Performance Lean Server for Large-Scale Verification . en. Apr. 2025. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21230v3 (visited on 05/15/2026). [121] S. Huang, P. Song, R. J. George, and A. Anandkumar. “LeanProgress: Guiding Search for Neural Theorem Proving via Proof Progress Prediction.” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. ,2025. arXiv: 2502.17925. url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17925. [122] T. Schick, J. D. - Y. R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom. “Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools.” en. [123] K. Yang, A. M. Swope, A. Gu, R. Chalamala, P. Song, S. Yu, S. Godil, R. Prenger, and A. Anandkumar. “LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models.” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. arXiv: 2306 . 15626. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15626. [124] P. Song, K. Yang, and A. Anandkumar. “Lean Copilot: Large Language Models as Copilots for Theorem Proving in Lean.” NeuS , 2024. arXiv: 2404 . 12534. url :https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12534. 140