Title: Gradient-Gated DPO: Stabilizing Preference Optimization in Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02626v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 02:24:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Gradient-Gated DPO: Stabilizing Preference Optimization in Language Models 

Inoussa Mouiche 

WASP Lab, School of Computer Science University of Windsor, ON N9B 3P4 

mouiche@uwindsor.ca 

# Abstract 

Preference optimization has become a central paradigm for aligning large language models with human feedback. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) simplifies reinforcement learning from human feedback by directly optimizing pairwise pref-erences, removing the need for reward modeling and policy optimization. However, recent work shows that DPO exhibits a squeezing effect , where negative gradients applied to rejected responses concentrate probability mass on high-confidence predictions while suppressing alternative responses. This phenomenon arises even in simple softmax models and can lead to systematic probability collapse during training. We introduce Gradient-Gated Preference Optimization (Gate-DPO), a method that stabilizes training by modulating rejected gradients according to the model’s probability geometry. When updates target extremely low-probability responses, the gate attenuates harmful gradients while preserving standard op-timization behavior. Gate-DPO addresses this optimization pathology without modifying the underlying preference objective and is complementary to existing methods such as extended SFT, IPO, and Cal-DPO. Experiments across multiple architectures and preference datasets show that Gate-DPO consistently reduces squeezing and improves chosen-response likelihood. Mass-dynamics analysis further reveals healthier optimization behavior, with improved preferred responses and reduced suppression of the overall distribution. Notably, smaller gated models can exhibit stronger chosen-response improvements than larger ungated models, suggesting that controlling gradient dynamics, rather than scale alone, is key to stable and efficient alignment. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly aligned with human preferences using reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Christiano et al., 2017, Stiennon et al., 2020, Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022b,a]. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [Rafailov et al., 2023] simplifies this pipeline by directly optimizing pairwise preferences from chosen–rejected comparisons, eliminating explicit reward modeling and reinforcement learning. However, recent work shows that preference optimization can exhibit pathological probability dynamics. Ren et Sutherland [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] identify the squeezing effect , where negative gradients on rejected responses concentrate probability mass on high-confidence outputs while suppressing other responses, including preferred ones. They show that this effect arises even in multiclass logistic regression, indicating that it is a fundamental consequence of softmax normalization under negative gradients. As a result, preference optimization may improve relative separation while degrading the overall probability distribution. Existing approaches mitigate this issue only indirectly. Data augmentation methods, Extend [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], increase rejected-response likelihood but do not modify the underlying optimization dynamics. Alternative objectives, including IPO [Azar et al., 2023], Cal-DPO [Xiao 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.02626v1 [cs.LG] 4 May 2026

et al., 2024], and recent objective-level remedies for gradient entanglement in margin-based alignment methods [Yuan et al., 2024a], improve alignment behavior but do not directly control the destructive gradient flow responsible for squeezing and probability collapse. We propose Gradient-Gated Preference Optimization (Gate-DPO), a simple mechanism that stabilizes preference learning by modulating rejected-response gradients based on the model’s probability geometry. When updates target low-probability “valleys,” the gate attenuates destructive gradients; otherwise, it recovers standard DPO behavior. This can be viewed as a probability-aware learning-rate mechanism that preserves preference optimization while preventing collapse. We validate this intuition in the multiclass logistic regression setting of [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], showing that gradient gating restores stable probability dynamics even in minimal softmax models (Appendix G). We evaluate Gate-DPO across multiple architectures (Pythia-410M, Qwen-0.5B, LLaMA-7B) and datasets (Anthropic-HH and UltraFeedback). Gate-DPO consistently reduces squeezing and improves chosen-response likelihood. Mass-dynamics analysis shows healthier optimization behavior, while preliminary pairwise win-rate evaluation provides initial evidence that these improvements translate into more preferred outputs. Finally, we find that stability is not determined by scale alone: gated Pythia-410M models exhibit larger positive chosen-response improvement than ungated LLaMA-7B models. This suggests that controlling gradient dynamics can reduce reliance on large models and enable more efficient alignment. More broadly, our results indicate that squeezing arises from fundamental properties of softmax learning, and that gradient gating offers a general mechanism for stabilizing preference optimization. 

# 2 Related Work 

Preference-based alignment. Large language models are commonly aligned with human prefer-ences using reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Christiano et al., 2017, Ziegler et al., 2019, Stiennon et al., 2020, Xu et al., 2024]. The standard RLHF pipeline performs supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on demonstrations, trains a reward model from pairwise preferences [Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022b], and optimizes the policy with reinforcement learning, typically PPO under a KL constraint [Schulman et al., 2017, Zhao et al., 2023]. While effective at scale [Ouyang et al., 2022, Anthropic, 2023], this pipeline requires multiple model components and careful RL tuning, motivating simpler preference-learning objectives. 

Direct preference optimization and variants. DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] replaces reward modeling and RL with a closed-form objective derived from the Bradley–Terry preference model [Bradley and Terry, 1952]. Subsequent work proposed variants such as IPO [Azar et al., 2023], which introduces a bounded squared objective, KTO [Ethayarajh et al., 2024], which incorporates prospect-theoretic preference modeling, and Cal-DPO [Xiao et al., 2024], which calibrates the scale of implicit rewards. Recent work has also identified gradient-level failures in margin-based alignment objectives. In particular, [Yuan et al., 2024a] characterize gradient entanglement , where coupled preferred and dispreferred gradients can prevent preferred responses from increasing while dispreferred responses decrease. Together, these results suggest that DPO-style objectives can exhibit pathological optimiza-tion dynamics even when the margin improves. 

Squeezing and mitigation strategies. Ren et Sutherland [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] show that negative gradients on rejected responses cause probability mass to concentrate on argmax predictions while suppressing other responses, a phenomenon they term the squeezing effect . Importantly, they demonstrate that this behavior arises even in multiclass logistic regression, indicating that it stems from softmax normalization rather than neural network architecture. Existing mitigations address this issue only indirectly. Extended SFT [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] increases rejected-response likelihood before DPO, while other approaches study data quality, reference models, or regularization [Yuan et al., 2024b, Chen et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024, Park et al., 2024]. In contrast, our work targets the optimization mechanism itself: motivated by the softmax-level pathology identified by [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], we modulate rejected-gradient magnitude based on probability geometry to prevent destructive updates while preserving standard preference learning. Unlike objective-level remedies such as IPO, Cal-DPO, or methods motivated by gradient entanglement [Yuan et al., 2024a], Gate-DPO intervenes directly on gradient flow and is complementary to alternative losses, calibration methods, and data-centric mitigation strategies. 2Figure 1: Empirical demonstration of three structural pathologies in DPO. All experiments use Pythia-410M on Anthropic-HH (5 epochs). (a) Unbounded optimization: after the SFT →DPO transition, absolute log-probabilities drift downward despite preference learning. (b) Squeezing: probability mass concentrates on the argmax while both chosen and rejected responses decrease. (c) 

Valley collapse: low-probability regions are disproportionately suppressed under standard DPO. 

# 3 Background and Motivation 

Let x denote a prompt, and let (y+, y −) be the preferred (chosen) and dispreferred (rejected) responses for x. Let πθ (y | x) be the policy model and πref (y | x) a fixed reference model. Define the log-ratio advantage 

∆θ (x, y ) = log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x). (1) DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] optimizes the pairwise objective 

LDPO (θ) = E(x,y +,y −)

h

− log σ β ∆θ (x, y +) − ∆θ (x, y −) i

, (2) where β > 0 is a temperature parameter and σ(z) = 11+ e−z is the sigmoid function. Sequence log-probabilities factorize as 

log πθ (y | x) = 

> T

X

> t=1

log πθ (yt | x, y <t ), (3) where T is the number of response tokens. For convenience, define the DPO logit 

zθ (x) = β ∆θ (x, y +) − ∆θ (x, y −). (4) 

3.1 Coupled Gradients in DPO 

Using the identity ddz [− log σ(z)] = σ(z) − 1, the gradients of the DPO loss with respect to the sequence log-probabilities are 

∂LDPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = −β 1 − σ(zθ (x)) , (5) 

∂LDPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = + β 1 − σ(zθ (x)) . (6) 

Key observation. DPO applies equal-magnitude, opposite-sign gradients to the chosen and rejected responses. Whenever the pair is informative (i.e., 1 − σ(zθ (x)) is non-negligible), optimization simultaneously (i) increases log πθ (y+ | x) and (ii) decreases log πθ (y− | x) with the same sequence-level coefficient. Because the objective constrains only the relative preference between y+ and y−, it does not directly regulate how probability mass is redistributed over the rest of the output space. 

3.2 The Squeezing Pathology 

This coupled gradient structure induces three interrelated pathologies, illustrated in Figure 1. 

i) Unbounded absolute drift (Fig. 1a): DPO optimizes preference ratios without constraining abso-lute probabilities. As a result, successful preference learning can coexist with persistent downward 3drift in both chosen and rejected log-probabilities after the SFT →DPO transition. 

ii) Squeezing via mass concentration (Fig. 1b): Because only relative differences matter, the objective can be improved by broadly reducing probability mass while concentrating it on the highest-confidence response (argmax). This causes preferred, rejected, and other responses to be jointly suppressed, even as the chosen–rejected separation improves. 

iii) Valley collapse (Fig. 1c): Equation (6) applies the same sequence-level gradient coefficient regardless of whether the rejected response already lies in a very low-probability region. Conse-quently, low-probability “valleys” receive disproportionately destructive updates, leading to severe suppression of already unlikely responses and nearby regions of the distribution. 

Empirical evidence. On Anthropic-HH with Pythia-410M, standard DPO reduces the chosen response by 10 .72 log units and the rejected response by 25 .73 , while increasing the argmax by 6.11 

and suppressing the rest of the distribution by 27 .75 . Thus, DPO improves relative ordering, but largely through destructive probability redistribution rather than absolute improvement of preferred responses. 

Motivation for Gate-DPO. These observations suggest that the core problem is not preference optimization itself, but the destructive gradient flow induced by softmax normalization under negative updates. This motivates a direct intervention at the gradient level: rather than redesigning the loss, we modulate rejected-response gradients according to the local probability geometry, attenuating updates in low-probability regions while leaving standard optimization behavior unchanged. 

# 4 Method: Gradient Gating for Preference Optimization 

Rather than redesigning the preference loss, we directly modulate the rejected-response gradient 

according to the current probability geometry of the model. Our goal is to preserve DPO’s relative preference improvement while attenuating destructive negative updates when the rejected response already lies in a very low-probability region. Intuitively, if y− is already in a “valley,” pushing it down further yields diminishing returns for preference learning but can damage nearby regions of the distribution. Gate-DPO addresses this by applying a smooth multiplicative gate g(x) ∈ (0 , 1) to the rejected contribution, while leaving the chosen update unchanged. 

4.1 Valley Statistics 

To detect whether a rejected response lies in a probability valley, we compute a scalar statistic sθ (x)

from its token probabilities. Let T −(x) be the number of non-padding tokens in y−, and define 

p−

> θ,t

(x) = πθ (y− 

> t

| x, y −

> <t

). (7) We consider two statistics in this work. 

Sequence-level statistic. We use the geometric mean of token probabilities: 

sseq  

> θ

(x) = exp 

 1

T −(x) log πθ (y− | x)



= exp 

 1

T −(x) 

> T−(x)

X

> t=1

log p−

> θ,t

(x)

 . (8) 

Token-level statistic. We use a lower-tail quantile of the token distribution: 

stok  

> θ

(x) = Quantile q



{p−

> θ,t

(x)}T −(x)

> t=1



, (9) where q ∈ (0 , 1) is a small quantile; in experiments we use q = 0 .10 . The sequence-level statistic captures overall sequence likelihood, whereas the token-level statistic focuses directly on low-probability tail behavior. 

4.2 Smooth Gate and Gated Objective 

Given the valley statistic sθ (x), we define a smooth gate 

gθ (x) = σ α sθ (x) − τ  , (10) 4where τ > 0 is a threshold and α > 0 controls transition steepness. When sθ (x) ≪ τ , the gate becomes small and attenuates the negative update; when sθ (x) ≫ τ , the gate remains close to 1 and we recover standard DPO behavior. In practice, we detach the gate from the computational graph, 

g(x) = σ(α(sθ (x) − τ )) .detach() , (11) so that the policy cannot manipulate the statistic itself to change the gate. We then replace the DPO logit with 

zgate  

> θ

(x) = β



∆θ (x, y +) − g(x) ∆ θ (x, y −)



, (12) and optimize 

LGate −DPO (θ) = E(x,y +,y −)

h

− log σ zgate  

> θ

(x)i

. (13) When g(x) = 1 , Eq. (13) reduces exactly to standard DPO. 

4.3 Gradient Interpretation 

Let cθ (x) = β(1 − σ(zgate  

> θ

(x))) ≥ 0 denote the gradient magnitude coefficient. Differentiating Eq. (13) with stop-gradient through g(x) gives 

∂LGate −DPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = − cθ (x), (14) 

∂LGate −DPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = + g(x) cθ (x). (15) Thus, Gate-DPO preserves the chosen-response gradient exactly while multiplying the rejected-response gradient by g(x) ∈ (0 , 1) . The mechanism is therefore highly targeted: it attenuates destructive negative updates in low-probability regions without weakening the positive learning signal on preferred responses. 

4.4 Modularity 

A key advantage of gradient gating is that it is loss-agnostic : the gate simply scales the rejected contribution before the preference loss is computed. For example, IPO [Azar et al., 2023] replaces the DPO logistic objective with a squared loss 

LIPO (θ) = E(x,y +,y −)

"

zθ (x) − 12β

2#

. (16) A gated version is obtained by replacing zθ (x) with zgate  

> θ

(x) from Eq. (12): 

LGate -IPO (θ) = E(x,y +,y −)

"

zgate  

> θ

(x) − 12β

2#

. (17) The same principle applies to calibration-based objectives such as Cal-DPO [Xiao et al., 2024]: gating acts on the rejected-response term before the loss is evaluated, making it complementary to reward calibration and other preference-learning modifications. A gated version of Cal-DPO is given in Appendix A. We verify this modularity experimentally in Section 6.2. 

# 5 Theoretical Properties 

We summarize three structural properties of Gate-DPO; full proofs and additional results are provided in Appendix B.1. 

Theorem 1 (Exact Gradient Scaling) . Under Gate-DPO with detached gate g(x), the rejected-response gradient is scaled multiplicatively: 

∂LGate −DPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = g(x) ∂LDPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) . (18) 5The chosen-response gradient is unchanged: 

∂LGate −DPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = ∂LDPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) . (19) 

Proof. Since Gate-DPO replaces the rejected term by g(x) log πθ (y−|x) in the preference logit and 

g(x) is detached, it is treated as constant during backpropagation. The result then follows directly from the chain rule. 

Corollary 2 (Strictly Positive Gradient Flow) . For all x, the gate satisfies g(x) ∈ (0 , 1) and, more specifically, 

g(x) ≥ σ(−ατ ) > 0. (20) 

Hence Gate-DPO attenuates rejected gradients without eliminating the learning signal. Proof. Because the valley statistic satisfies sθ (x) ≥ 0,

g(x) = σ(α(sθ (x) − τ )) ≥ σ(−ατ ),

and the sigmoid is strictly positive for finite arguments. 

Corollary 3 (Benign Behavior Outside Valleys) . If sθ (x) ≥ τ + δ for some δ > 0, then 

1 − g(x) ≤ e−αδ . (21) 

Therefore, when valleys are absent, Gate-DPO differs from standard DPO by at most an exponentially small factor in the rejected gradient. Proof. If sθ (x) ≥ τ + δ, then g(x) = σ(αu ) for some u ≥ δ. Using 1 − σ(u) = σ(−u) ≤ e−u for 

u ≥ 0 gives the bound. 

Additional results. Appendix B.1 provides further properties, including non-expansiveness and first-order attenuation statements. 

# 6 Experiments 

We empirically evaluate whether gradient gating mitigates the squeezing and valley-collapse behaviors identified in Section 4. Our experiments address three questions: (i) does gating prevent destructive probability drift, (ii) how does it compare to existing mitigation strategies, and (iii) does it generalize across models and datasets while yielding improved task-level behavior? 

6.1 Experimental Setup Datasets and models: We evaluate on Anthropic-HH [Bai et al., 2022b] and UltraFeedback [Cui et al., 2023] and test three model scales: Pythia-410M [Biderman et al., 2023], Qwen-0.5B [Bai et al., 2023], and LLaMA-7B [Touvron et al., 2023]. 

Training details: Models are initialized from SFT checkpoints and fine-tuned for 5–6 epochs with batch size 4, learning rate 5 × 10 −7, and RMSprop /AdamW. For Gate-DPO, we use the settings 

τ = 0 .10 for sequence-level gating, τ = 0 .005 for token-level gating, q = 0 .10 , and α = 50 .Additional implementation details. algorithm and cost, and hyperparameter sensitivity analyses are provided in Appendix C Appendix D.1 and Appendix D.2. 

Evaluation protocol: We use two complementary evaluations. First, we track learning-dynamics metrics such as ∆ log π(y+|x), ∆ log π(y−|x), preference separation, and gate activation on held-out validation data. Second, we conduct a preliminary pairwise win-rate study on LlaMa-7B using GPT-4 as judge. To further diagnose probability redistribution, we also evaluate a mass-dynamics protocol adapted from [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], scoring chosen, rejected, and unrelated response variants under both the SFT reference and the trained policy. Full construction details and representative examples are given in Appendix E and Appendix F. 6Figure 2: Method comparison on Pythia-410M (on 5k Anthropic-HH pairs). Top: trajectories for chosen, rejected, and argmax responses for DPO, Extend, Cal-DPO, IPO, and gated variants. Bottom-left: final chosen-response change. Bottom-center: gating improves both DPO and Cal-DPO, and partially improves IPO. Bottom-right: improvement over the DPO baseline. Gate-DPO (tok) achieves the strongest gain, while gated variants consistently outperform their ungated counterparts. 

6.2 Gating vs. Existing Mitigations 

Figure 2 compares gradient gating against three representative mitigation strategies on Pythia-410M with Anthropic-HH: data augmentation via extended SFT [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], calibration via Cal-DPO [Xiao et al., 2024], and loss redesign via IPO [Azar et al., 2023]. 

Baseline behavior: Standard DPO exhibits severe squeezing, with ∆chosen = −10 .0. Extended SFT performs even worse ( −12 .2), indicating that improving the initial likelihood of rejected responses alone does not resolve the destructive gradient dynamics. Cal-DPO substantially reduces the severity of the collapse ( −2.1), and IPO provides a similar improvement ( −1.0), but both still leave chosen-response drift negative. Thus, among ungated baselines, calibration and loss redesign mitigate the pathology but do not eliminate it. 

Effect of gradient gating and modularity: Gate-DPO reverses the direction of drift, yielding 

∆chosen = +3 .9 for sequence-level gating and +4 .4 for token-level gating, outperforming all un-gated baselines. Applying the same mechanism to Cal-DPO also improves performance, raising chosen-response change from −2.1 to +1 .1. For IPO, token-level gating brings the chosen-response change close to neutral ( −0.2), while sequence-level gating remains negative ( −2.0), indicating that modularity holds most clearly for DPO and Cal-DPO in this setting. The top-row trajectories further show that gating stabilizes rejected responses and reduces argmax concentration throughout training. 

Token-level advantage: Among all methods, Gate-DPO (q10) achieves the strongest chosen-response improvement ( +4 .4), while Extend + Gate-DPO (tok) remains positive ( +2 .2) but does not surpass the ungated token-level variant. Whenever both versions are evaluated, token-level gating outper-forms sequence-level gating, improving from +3 .9 to +4 .4 for DPO and from −2.0 to −0.2 for IPO. This suggests that gating the low-probability tail at the token level provides finer control than sequence-averaged statistics. 

Mass-dynamics protocol. To analyze how preference optimization redistributes probability mass, we follow the learning-dynamics setting of [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] and score a fixed evaluation set under both the SFT reference πref and the trained policy πθ . Each prompt is paired with preferred-response variants, rejected-response variants, and unrelated or off-target responses; representative examples and metric definitions are given in Appendix F. We report three aggregate quantities: Margin 

∆ (change in chosen–rejected separation), ∆ Chosen (change in preferred-response likelihood), and ∆

Others (change in unrelated or off-target likelihood). Positive ∆ Chosen indicates healthier preference learning, whereas ∆ Others values closer to zero indicate less destructive redistribution. 7Table 1: Mass-dynamics evaluation across preference optimization methods. Margin ∆ measures preference separation, ∆ Chosen tracks change in preferred-response likelihood, and ∆ Others measures collateral suppression of the remaining distribution.                                                        

> Method Margin ∆∆Chosen ∆Others Observation
> DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] 15.60 -10.05 -28.11 largest margin, severe squeezing Extend + DPO [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] 8.86 -12.20 -20.27 weaker margin, still destructive Cal-DPO [Xiao et al., 2024] 11.82 -2.06 -11.40 reduced damage, chosen still drops IPO [Azar et al., 2023] 8.48 -0.95 -7.82 moderate trade-off, limited damage Gate-DPO (seq) 9.56 +3.88 -4.76 positive chosen, healthy trade-off Gate-DPO (q10) 9.92 +4.45 -6.86 best chosen improvement, balanced Extend + Gate-DPO (seq) 4.76 +1.78 -2.25 healthy but lower separation Extend + Gate-DPO (q10) 4.97 +2.24 -3.99 healthy but lower separation Gate-Cal-DPO (seq) 8.79 +0.86 -1.20 best preservation Gate-Cal-DPO (q10) 9.03 +1.08 -4.34 healthy and calibrated Gate-IPO (seq) 8.61 -1.95 -6.92 reduced damage, chosen still drops Gate-IPO (q10) 8.98 -0.16 -5.68 near-neutral chosen, moderate damage

Mass-dynamics analysis. Table 1 shows that margin alone is not sufficient: baseline DPO achieves the largest separation, but does so through severe destructive redistribution, with large negative shifts on both preferred and unrelated responses. Consistent with [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], Extend + DPO reduces collateral damage ( ∆Others = −20 .27 vs. −28 .11 for DPO), but yields even worse chosen performance ( ∆chosen = −12 .20 vs. −10 .05 ). Cal-DPO and IPO reduce the severity of the collapse, yet still leave ∆chosen < 0. In contrast, the gated variants improve chosen-response likelihood while substantially reducing collateral suppression. Extend + Gate-DPO restores positive chosen improvement ( +2 .24 ) with low collateral damage ( −3.99 ), showing that gradient control complements data augmentation. Among all methods, Gate-DPO (q10) achieves the strongest ∆chosen ,whereas Gate-Cal-DPO (seq) yields the best preservation of the remainder of the distribution. Overall, healthier preference optimization is characterized not by maximal margin, but by positive movement on chosen responses with limited damage elsewhere. 

6.3 Generalization Across Architectures and Datasets 

We next evaluate Gate-DPO across three architectures (Pythia-410M, Qwen-0.5B, LLaMA-7B) and two datasets (Anthropic-HH, UltraFeedback), forming a 3 × 2 validation matrix. 

Baseline variability: Baseline DPO behavior varies substantially across model scales and datasets. On Anthropic-HH, squeezing ranges from severe on Pythia-410M ( −10 .72 ) to nearly absent on LLaMA-7B ( −0.09 ). On UltraFeedback, the pattern changes: Pythia shows moderate degradation (−6.24 ), Qwen shows stronger degradation ( −7.16 ), and LLaMA remains stable ( +0 .96 ). These results indicate that squeezing severity depends on both model characteristics and data distribution. 

Consistent improvement: Across all six model–dataset configurations, Gate-DPO yields positive 

∆chosen values, ranging from +0 .57 to +8 .43 . Importantly, no setting degrades relative to the corresponding baseline, indicating that gating behaves safely even when the original optimizer is already stable. 

severity-adaptive gains: The magnitude of improvement scales with pathology severity. For example, Pythia-410M on UltraFeedback gains +14 .67 , whereas LLaMA-7B on Anthropic-HH gains +0 .67 .This pattern supports the interpretation of Gate-DPO as an adaptive stabilization mechanism: it intervenes most strongly when destructive updates are most severe. 

Scale is not the whole story: Interestingly, Pythia-410M with Gate-DPO attains larger positive chosen-response drift than ungated LLaMA-7B on UltraFeedback. This suggests that optimization stability is not determined by scale alone, and that controlling gradient dynamics can reduce the practical reliance on large, resource-intensive models. 

Gate activation: Gate activation ranges from roughly 10% to 35%, with higher activation in more pathological regimes. This indicates that the mechanism adapts to the local severity of the optimization pathology rather than applying uniform regularization. 8Figure 3: Validation matrix across architectures and datasets. (a) Baseline DPO. (b) Gate-DPO. (c) Improvement over baseline. (d–e) Per-dataset comparisons. (f) Gate activation. Gains increase with the severity of the baseline pathology. Table 2: Preliminary pairwise evaluation on LLaMA-7B using GPT-4 as evaluator.      

> Comparison Win-rate
> Gate-DPO (q10) vs DPO 59% Gate-DPO (q10) vs Cal-DPO 64% Gate-DPO (q10) vs Gate-Cal-DPO 56% Gate-Cal-DPO vs Cal-DPO 68%

6.4 Preliminary Pairwise Win-Rate Evaluation 

To complement the learning-dynamics analysis, we conduct a preliminary pairwise win-rate evaluation on 100 held-out prompts using LLaMA-7B checkpoints and GPT-4 as judge. Table 2 shows that Gate-DPO (q10) outperforms Cal-DPO (64%), remains competitive with Gate-Cal-DPO (56%), and exceeds DPO (59%). These results provide additional task-level evidence, consistent with prior work [Ren and Sutherland, 2025, Xiao et al., 2024], that healthier optimization dynamics can translate into more preferred outputs, although larger win-rate studies across more models with human judges are left for future work. 

# 7 Discussion 

We study optimization pathologies in direct preference optimization and introduce Gradient-Gated Preference Optimization (Gate-DPO), a simple mechanism that stabilizes training by modulating rejected gradients according to the model’s probability geometry. Building on the squeezing effect identified by [Ren and Sutherland, 2025], we argue that destructive updates arise from the interaction between softmax normalization and negative gradients. Across architectures and datasets, Gate-DPO consistently reduces squeezing, improves chosen-response likelihood, and remains compatible with existing mitigations such as Extend, IPO, and Cal-DPO. A key empirical finding is that controlling optimization dynamics can reduce the practical reliance on model scale: gated 410M models exhibit larger positive chosen-response drift than ungated 7B models. This suggests that some performance differences often attributed to scale may instead reflect differences in optimization stability, with practical implications for reducing compute cost and improving deployability. 9Limitations and Future Work. Our analysis focuses on off-policy preference datasets, whereas many alignment pipelines incorporate on-policy data collection [Guo et al., 2024, Tajwar et al., 2024]; understanding how gradient gating interacts with on-policy learning remains open. It is also unclear whether similar mechanisms explain broader phenomena often attributed to scale, such as abrupt capability gains or optimization phase transitions. Finally, our pairwise win-rate results are preliminary; broader task-level evaluation across more models, prompts, and judges is needed. More generally, our results suggest a testable hypothesis: smaller gated models may achieve competitive, or even superior, win-rate performance relative to larger ungated models. Overall, directly controlling gradient dynamics appears to be a promising path toward more stable and efficient preference-based alignment. 10 References 

Anthropic. Claude 2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2 , 2023. Accessed: 2026. Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, et al. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12036 , 2023. Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 , 2023. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Chris Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dan Li, Evan Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jack Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Josh Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamil ˙e Lukosuite, Laura Lovitt, Mario Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas Mercado, Nandi DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Rachel Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Sam Kravec, Samuel E. Showk, Stanislav Fort, Todd Lanham, Tom Telleen-Lawton, Thomas Conerly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022a. Yuntao Bai et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 , 2022b. Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023. Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335 ,2024. Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30, 2017. Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01377 , 2023. Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306 , 2024. Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. Direct language model alignment from online ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792 , 2024. Zhihan Liu, Miao Sharma, Zhuoran Zhao, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I. Jordan. Provably mitigating overoptimization in rlhf: Your sft loss is implicitly an adversarial regularizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16436 , 2024. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35, 2022. Ryan Park, Rafael Rafailov, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Disentangling length from quality in direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19159 , 2024. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher D Manning. Di-rect preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290 , 2023. 11 Yi Ren and Danica J. Sutherland. Learning dynamics of llm finetuning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. arXiv:2407.10490v4. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. Fahim Tajwar, Anikait Singh, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Jeff Schneider, Tengyang Xie, Stefano Ermon, Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Preference fine-tuning of llms should leverage suboptimal, on-policy data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14367 , 2024. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. Binghai Wang, Rui Dou, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Wei Hua, Wei Shen, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin, Qin Liu, Yuhao Zhou, et al. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part ii: Reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06080 , 2024. Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play preference optimization for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00675 , 2024. Teng Xiao, Yige Yuan, Huaisheng Zhu, Mingxiao Li, and Vasant G. Honavar. Cal-dpo: Calibrated direct preference optimization for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14516 ,2024. Haoran Xu, Amr Sharaf, Yunmo Chen, Weiting Tan, Lingfeng Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Kenton Murray, and Young Jin Kim. Contrastive preference optimization: Pushing the boundaries of llm performance in machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08417 , 2024. Hui Yuan, Yifan Zeng, Yue Wu, Huazheng Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Liu Leqi. A common pitfall of margin-based language model alignment: Gradient entanglement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13828 ,2024a. Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020 , 2024b. Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. Slic-hf: Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425 , 2023. Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019. 12 A Modularity Beyond DPO 

Gate-Cal-DPO (Calibrated Direct Preference Optimization). Cal-DPO [Xiao et al., 2024] augments the standard contrastive preference objective with calibration terms that constrain the implicit rewards of chosen and rejected responses to remain on the scale of the ground-truth rewards. Because Gate-DPO acts by scaling the rejected-response contribution before computing the loss, it applies naturally to Cal-DPO as well. Let ∆θ (x, y ) = log πθ (y|x) − log πref (y|x) and c = 12β . A gated version of Cal-DPO can be written as 

LGate -Cal -DPO (θ) = − log σ ∆θ (x, y +) − g(x)∆ θ (x, y −)+ ∆θ (x, y +) − c2+ g(x)∆ θ (x, y −) + c2 ,

(22) where g(x) ∈ (0 , 1) is the detached gate defined in Eq. (10) . This preserves Cal-DPO’s calibration objective on the chosen response while attenuating destructive negative updates on rejected responses in low-probability regions. Thus, gradient gating is complementary to calibration-based preference optimization, just as it is complementary to IPO. 

# B Additional Theory and Proofs 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 1 

Proof. We prove the result for a single triple (x, y +, y −) and then note that taking expectation over the dataset preserves the equalities by linearity. For brevity, write 

z = zgate  

> θ

(x) = β



∆θ (x, y +) − g(x) ∆ θ (x, y −)



, L = − log σ(z).

Recall also 

∆θ (x, y ) = log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x),

and the stop-gradient (detached) assumption implies 

∂g (x)

∂θ = 0 .

Step 1: Outer derivative. Using σ′(z) = σ(z)(1 − σ(z)) , we have 

∂L

∂z = − 1

σ(z) σ′(z) = − 1

σ(z) σ(z)(1 − σ(z)) = −(1 − σ(z)) .

Define the nonnegative coefficient 

cθ (x) = β 1 − σ(zgate  

> θ

(x))  ≥ 0.

Then equivalently, 

∂L

∂z = − 1 − σ(z) = − cθ (x)

β .

Step 2: Derivative w.r.t. the chosen log-probability. By the chain rule, 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = ∂L

∂z · ∂z ∂ log πθ (y+ | x) .

From the definition of z and ∆θ , and noting log πref is constant w.r.t. θ,

∂z ∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = β · ∂∆θ (x, y +)

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = β. 

Therefore, 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) =



− cθ (x)

β



· β = −cθ (x),

which matches Eq. (14). 13 Step 3: Derivative w.r.t. the rejected log-probability. Similarly, 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = ∂L

∂z · ∂z ∂ log πθ (y− | x) .

Now, ∂z ∂ log πθ (y− | x) = β · ∂∂ log πθ (y− | x)



− g(x)∆ θ (x, y −)



.

Because g(x) is detached, it behaves as a constant in differentiation, hence 

∂z ∂ log πθ (y− | x) = −βg (x) · ∂∆θ (x, y −)

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = −βg (x).

Thus, 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) =



− cθ (x)

β



· (−βg (x)) = g(x)cθ (x),

which matches Eq. (15). 

Step 4: Exact scaling relative to DPO. Under standard DPO (which corresponds to g(x) = 1 ), the rejected-response partial derivative equals 

∂LDPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = cθ (x) g(x)=1 

.

Under Gate-DPO, the rejected gradient equals g(x) times the corresponding DPO-form coefficient evaluated at the gated logit, i.e., 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y− | x) = g(x) cθ (x).

Moreover, the chosen-response derivative is unchanged in form: 

∂LGate -DPO 

∂ log πθ (y+ | x) = −cθ (x).

Finally, taking expectation over (x, y +, y −) preserves these equalities, completing the proof. 

Corollary 4 (Non-Expansiveness) . For all x,

∥∇ θ LGate ∥ ≤ ∥∇ θ LDPO ∥ (rejected term) .

Thus Gate-DPO never amplifies destructive rejected gradients. Proof. Since g(x) ∈ (0 , 1) , Theorem 1 immediately implies 

∥∇ θ LGate ∥ = g(x)∥∇ θ LDPO ∥ ≤ ∥∇ θ LDPO ∥.

Theorem 5 (Local Attenuation of Rejected Log-Probability Update) . Consider one gradient descent step θ′ = θ − η∇θ LGate −DPO . Under first-order approximation, the rejected log-probability change satisfies 

∆ log πθ (y−|x) ≈ − η c θ (x)



g(x) ∇θ log πθ (y−|x) 2 − ∇ θ log πθ (y−|x)⊤∇θ log πθ (y+|x)



,

(23) 

where cθ (x) = β 1 − σ(zgate  

> θ

(x))  ≥ 0.Proof. By first-order Taylor expansion, 

∆ log πθ (y−|x) ≈ ∇ θ log πθ (y−|x)⊤(θ′ − θ) = −η ∇θ log πθ (y−|x)⊤∇θ LGate −DPO .

Using Eqs. (14)–(15) and the chain rule, 

∇θ LGate −DPO = cθ (x)



− ∇ θ log πθ (y+|x) + g(x)∇θ log πθ (y−|x)



.

Substituting and expanding the inner product yields the stated expression. 

Corollary 6 (Approximate g(x)-Scaling) . If ∇θ log πθ (y−|x)⊤∇θ log πθ (y+|x) ≈ 0 (or is negligi-ble compared to ∥∇ θ log πθ (y−|x)∥2), then 

∆ log πθ (y−|x) ≈ − η c θ (x) g(x) ∇θ log πθ (y−|x) 2 ,

and the magnitude of the rejected update is attenuated by g(x) relative to the ungated case. 

14 Algorithm 1: Gradient Gating for Direct Preference Optimization (Gate-DPO) 

Input :Dataset D = {(x, y +, y −)}, policy πθ , frozen reference πref , temperature β, gate parameters τ, α , valley statistic stat ∈ { SEQ _MEAN , Q}, quantile q, learning rate η.

Output : Trained policy πθ 

> 1

foreach minibatch B ⊂ D do  

> 2

Compute log πθ (y± | x) and log πref (y± | x) 

> 3

∆θ (x, y ±) ← log πθ (y± | x) − log πref (y± | x) 

> 4

if stat =SEQ _MEAN then  

> 5

T −(x) ← valid tokens in y− 

> 6

sθ (x) ← exp 

 1  

> T−(x)

log πθ (y− | x)

 

> 7

else  

> 8

Extract token probabilities p−

> θ,t

(x) 

> 9

sθ (x) ← Quantile q



{p−

> θ,t

(x)}

 

> 10

g(x) ← σ(α(sθ (x) − τ ))  

> 11

g(x) ← stop _gradient( g(x))  

> 12

z(x) ← β ∆θ (x, y +) − g(x) ∆ θ (x, y −) 

> 13

L ← 1

> |B|

P 

> (x,y +,y −)∈B

− log σ(z(x)) 

// Compute one gate per sample, then aggregate the minibatch loss  

> 14

θ ← θ − η∇θ L 

> 15

return πθ

# C Implementation Details 

Hyperparameters. Gate-DPO introduces two additional hyperparameters: the gating threshold τ

and the sigmoid steepness α. We use τ = 0 .10 for sequence-level gating ( sseq  

> θ

) and τ = 0 .005 for token-level gating ( stok  

> θ

), corresponding to the robust operating regions identified in Appendix D.1. The steepness is fixed at α = 50 , with performance largely insensitive over α ∈ [10 , 100] (Ap-pendix D.2). For token-level statistics, we set q = 0 .10 to capture the lower tail of the distribution. We retain the standard DPO temperature β = 0 .1 for Gate variants and β = 1 e − 3 for calibrated DPO. All experiments were conducted on Modal Cloud with NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs. 

Algorithm and cost. Gate-DPO extends DPO by computing a valley statistic sθ (x) on the rejected response and applying a detached gate g(x) = σ(α(sθ (x) − τ )) to scale the rejected log-ratio term (Algorithm 1). For both sequence-level and token-level gating, T −(x) counts only non-padding response tokens in the rejected response y−; prompt tokens and padding positions are excluded. For token-level gating, the probabilities {p−

> θ,t

(x)}T −(x) 

> t=1

are obtained by teacher-forced evaluation of the rejected response. The valley statistic and gate are computed independently for each preference pair in the minibatch, so different samples may receive different attenuation factors. The additional computation is minimal: O(T −(x)) for statistic evaluation and O(1) for gating, with no extra backward-pass cost due to gradient detachment. In practice, the overhead remains below 5% compared to standard DPO. 

# D Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

D.1 Gating Threshold τ

We evaluate sensitivity to the gating threshold τ by sweeping τ ∈ [0 .001 , 0.20] for sequence-level (seq_mean ) and token-level ( q10 ) gating on Pythia-410M (2k training examples). Results are shown in Figure 4. 15 Figure 4: Sensitivity to gating threshold τ . Sequence-level ( seq_mean ) and token-level ( q10 ) gating are evaluated across τ values on Pythia-410M (2k examples). Top: Chosen/rejected log-probability changes; positive ∆chosen indicates squeezing prevention. Middle: Gating rate and performance trade-off, showing optimal operating regions. Bottom: Gradient modulation behavior, illustrating smooth attenuation without hard clipping. Shaded bands mark success regions ( τ ∈ [0 .08 , 0.15] for seq_mean; [0 .003 , 0.008] for q10). Baseline DPO shown with dashed lines. 

Optimal Configurations. Sequence-level gating performs best at τ = 0 .10 (∆chosen = +0 .52 , vs. baseline −6.70 ), while token-level gating peaks at τ = 0 .005 (∆chosen = +0 .68 ). Both configurations eliminate squeezing ( ∆chosen > 0) while maintaining rejected suppression. 

Gating–Performance Trade-off. Increasing τ increases the fraction of gated samples. At optimal thresholds, sequence-level gating activates on 31% of samples, while token-level activates on 39%. Lower τ provides weaker mitigation; excessively large τ over-attenuates rejected gradients. 

Success Region. We define successful configurations as satisfying: (i) ∆chosen > 0, (ii) ∆rejected < 0,and (iii) preference gap closure < 4 log units. Sequence-level gating succeeds for τ ∈ [0 .08 , 0.15] ,and token-level for τ ∈ [0 .003 , 0.008] , demonstrating robustness to moderate threshold variation. 

Gradient Modulation. The gating function provides smooth attenuation without blocking gradients. At τ = 0 .10 , the effective rejected gradient magnitude is reduced to approximately 73% of full strength; at τ = 0 .005 (token-level), it is reduced to 27%. This confirms controlled, continuous modulation rather than hard clipping. 

Practical Recommendation. We recommend τ = 0 .10 (sequence-level) for stability and inter-pretability, and τ = 0 .005 (token-level) for maximal chosen-response improvement. Monitoring the percentage of gated samples (target range 30–40%) provides a simple diagnostic when adapting Gate-DPO to new datasets. 16 Figure 5: Robustness to sigmoid steepness α. (a) Chosen response change shows minimal variation (<0.3 log units) across α ∈ [10 , 90] for both gating methods, all successfully preventing squeezing (baseline DPO: −6.70 ). (b) Rejected response protection remains consistent. (c) Gate activation statistics (mean gate value, % gated) stay nearly constant, confirming τ controls gating frequency while α affects only transition sharpness. Experiments on Pythia-410M, 2k examples. 

D.2 Sigmoid Steepness Sensitivity α

We analyze sensitivity to the sigmoid steepness parameter α by sweeping α ∈ [10 , 90] while fixing 

τ at optimal values from §D.1 (sequence-level: τ = 0 .10 , token-level: τ = 0 .005 ). Figure 5 demonstrates remarkable robustness: performance varies by less than 0.3 log units across the entire range. For sequence-level gating, ∆chosen ranges from +0 .48 to +0 .71 (all preventing squeezing vs baseline −6.70 ), with α = 10 slightly optimal. Token-level shows similar stability, varying from 

+0 .61 to +0 .90 . Importantly, gate activation statistics (panel c) remain nearly constant—mean gate values shift by only ∼0.08 and gating percentages stay fixed at 31% (sequence) and 39% (token), confirming that τ controls which samples are gated while α affects only the transition sharpness. We use α = 50 (standard sigmoid steepness) throughout our main experiments, noting that this choice is robust: any value α ∈ [10 , 100] provides comparable performance. This insensitivity to α

indicates Gate-DPO does not require careful tuning of the sigmoid steepness. 

# E Training and Evaluation Data Examples 

Training example. Table 3 shows a representative training sample. During preference training, the model observes only the prompt x and the paired responses (y+, y −).Table 3: Representative preference-training example.       

> Prompt:
> Human: Hi, I want to learn to play horseshoes. Can you teach me? Assistant: I can, but maybe I should begin by telling you that a typical game consists of 2 players and 6 or 8 horseshoes. Human: O...
> Chosen ( y+):
> A horseshoe is usually made out of metal and is about 3 to 3.5 inches long and around 1 inch thick. The horseshoe should also have a 2 inch by 3 inch...
> Rejected ( y−):
> Horseshoes are either metal or plastic discs. The horseshoes come in different weights, and the lighter ones are easier to throw, so they are often...

Evaluation variants. For each prompt, we additionally score multiple response variants to analyze how training redistributes probability mass. Table 4 shows representative examples. 

Purpose of the evaluation set. These variants are not used as training targets. Instead, they allow us to probe whether preference optimization increases probability on preferred responses, suppresses 17 Table 4: Representative evaluation variants used in the mass-dynamics analysis.               

> Variant Example response
> Preferred-response variants
> chosen A horseshoe is usually made out of metal and is about 3 to 3.5 inches...
> chosen_initial Each player takes a horseshoe, puts it in a rack, and begins to place...
> chosen_selfr @@@ Original Sentence: A horseshoe is usually made out of metal...
> chosen_gptsemantic A typical horseshoe is crafted from metal, measuring approximately 3 to 3.5 inches...
> chosen_gptformat A reformatted or style-modified variant of the chosen response.
> Rejected-response variants
> rejected Horseshoes are either metal or plastic discs. The horseshoes come in different weights...
> reject_gptsemantic A semantic variant of the rejected response.
> reject_gptformat A format-modified variant of the rejected response.
> Irrelevant / off-target responses
> irr_train The chicken stock is much tastier if you use a pressure cooker...
> irr_test Great question! This is something that we’ll be studying for a long time...
> irr_hum The mysterious cat prowled through the moonlit forest...
> random_permute also at 3 is long horseshoes. also should of inches to horseshoe have...
> random_nonhum long work, I that question! factors the is far, a so at including...

rejected responses in a controlled way, and avoids unnecessary damage to unrelated parts of the distribution. 

# F Mass Dynamic Evaluation 

F.1 Mass-Dynamics Evaluation Protocol Training data. All preference optimization methods are trained on standard pairwise preference data of the form (x, y +, y −), where x is a prompt, y+ is the preferred response, and y− is the dispreferred response. Our main learning-dynamics analysis is conducted on Anthropic-HH, with additional validation on UltraFeedback. During training, models optimize only over these preference triplets and do not use the auxiliary response variants introduced below. Representative examples are provided in Appendix E. 

Evaluation data. To analyze how training redistributes probability mass, we construct a fixed evaluation set following the learning-dynamics setting of [Ren and Sutherland, 2025]. For each prompt, we score multiple response types under both the SFT reference model πref and the trained policy πθ . These response types fall into three groups: • Preferred-response variants: the original chosen response and its semantic or struc-tural variants (e.g., chosen , chosen_initial , chosen_selfr , chosen_gptsemantic ,

chosen_gptformat ). • Rejected-response variants: the original rejected response and related variants (e.g., 

rejected , reject_gptsemantic , reject_gptformat ). • Irrelevant / off-target responses: unrelated, corrupted, or off-distribution text (e.g., 

irr_train , irr_test , irr_hum , random_permute , random_nonhum ). These variants are used only for evaluation and are not optimization targets during preference training. Appendix E shows representative examples. 

Metrics. For each response type y, we compute the conditional log-probability log π(y | x) under both πref and πθ . We then report three aggregate quantities: 

∆Chosen = E(x,y )∈Y chosen [log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x)] , (24) 

∆Others = E(x,y )∈Y other [log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x)] , (25) 

∆Margin = E(x,y +,y −)

  log πθ (y+ | x) − log πθ (y− | x) −   log πref (y+ | x) − log πref (y− | x) .

(26) 18 Here, ∆ Chosen measures whether training increases probability assigned to preferred responses; posi-tive values indicate healthier preference learning dynamics. ∆ Others measures collateral suppression of unrelated or off-target responses; values closer to zero indicate less destructive redistribution. ∆

Margin measures how strongly training increases preference separation between chosen and rejected responses. 

Interpretation. This protocol complements task-level evaluation by directly measuring how pref-erence optimization reshapes the output distribution. In particular, it distinguishes methods that improve preference separation through healthy redistribution from those that do so through destructive probability collapse. 

# G Softmax Pathology in a Minimal Setting 

[Ren and Sutherland, 2025] showed that the squeezing effect is not specific to language models but arises from the interaction between softmax normalization and negative gradients. In their analysis, even a simple multiclass logistic regression model exhibits the same phenomenon: when a negative gradient is applied to a low-probability class, both the chosen and rejected responses decrease while probability mass shifts toward the argmax class. This observation establishes squeezing as a fundamental property of softmax optimization rather than an artifact of large neural architectures. We reproduce this minimal experiment and extend it with our gradient gating mechanism. The model is a K-class logistic regression with features ϕ(x) ∈ Rd and linear weights W ∈ Rd×K producing 

p = softmax( W ⊤ϕ(x)) . (27) Standard gradient descent on cross-entropy gives 

Wt+1 = Wt − η ϕ (x)( p − ey )⊤, (28) where negative learning rates ( η < 0) simulate the rejected-response updates used in preference optimization. This setup isolates the effect of softmax normalization without neural architectures, sequence modeling, or language-specific structure. To prevent pathological updates, we introduce a gated update rule 

Wt+1 = Wt − η g (p(y)) ϕ(x)( p − ey )⊤, (29) where 

g(p) = σ(α(log p − log τ )) . (30) The gate reduces gradient magnitude when the target probability lies in the extreme tail of the distribution. In our experiments we use α = 50 and τ ≈ 1/K (τ = 0 .03 for K = 50 , τ = 10 −8 for 

K = 1000 ). We reproduce the five canonical cases from [Ren and Sutherland, 2025]: positive gradient updates (A), negative gradients on flat distributions (B), negative gradients on peaks (C), negative gradients on valley responses (D), and a large-vocabulary setting (E). Figure 6 shows the distributions before the update (gray), after baseline optimization (blue), and after gated updates (green). The baseline results reproduce the original observation: when a negative gradient targets a val-ley response, softmax normalization causes extreme squeezing and the update effectively freezes (∆max ≈ 3×10 −6). With gating, the learning rate is automatically reduced for such cases ( g ≈ 0.38 ), allowing the update to remain effective while preventing collapse. The resulting probability change increases by more than twenty orders of magnitude and preserves entropy in the distribution. Across all scenarios, the gate activates only when probabilities fall below the threshold, leaving normal opti-mization unaffected. The same mechanism also scales to larger vocabularies ( K = 1000 ), confirming that the approach remains effective in settings closer to neural language models. These controlled experiments confirm two key points. First, the squeezing phenomenon identified by [Ren and Sutherland, 2025] arises directly from softmax normalization under negative gradients. 19 Figure 6: Toy logistic regression experiment illustrating the softmax pathology ( τsmallK = 0 .03 ,

τlargeK = 10 −8, α = 50 ). Gray: initial distribution; blue: baseline update; green: gated update. Negative gradients applied to low-probability classes cause extreme squeezing under standard softmax optimization. Gradient gating detects such valley responses and reduces the effective learning rate, restoring stable updates while preserving entropy. Second, adaptive gradient gating mitigates this pathology without altering the model architecture or objective. This minimal demonstration motivates the neural network experiments presented in the main paper. Figure 7 shows hyperparameter impact on low-probability token behavior. Strict gating (smaller τ )fully suppresses destructive gradients, preventing any probability change in the tail region. 20 Figure 7: Strict gradient gating ( τsmallK = 0 .01 , τlargeK = 10 −6, α = 50 ) provides stronger anti-squeeze protection than loose gating Fig. 6. Strict gating fully suppresses gradients on low-probability tokens (row D: g = 0 .00 vs. 0.38 ; row E: ∆AS  

> max

≈ 0 vs. +4 .88 × 10 −1), resulting in near-complete preservation of the probability tail (green line in row E stays flat) while maintaining comparable protection for y+ 

> u

(row B). This demonstrates the hyperparameter trade-off: stricter thresholds provide stronger distributional preservation at the cost of more aggressive gradient suppression. 21