Title: AgentPSO: Evolving Agent Reasoning Skill via Multi-agent Particle Swarm Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08704v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:36:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# AgentPSO: Evolving Agent Reasoning Skill via Multi-agent Particle Swarm Optimization 

Hyunmin Hwang* Jaemin Kim* Choonghan Kim Hangeol Chang Jong Chul Ye 

*Equal contribution Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 

{hyunmin_hwang, kjm981995, choonghankim, hangeol, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

Multi-agent reasoning has shown promise for improving the problem-solving ability of large language models by allowing multiple agents to explore diverse reasoning paths. However, most existing multi-agent methods rely on inference-time debate or aggregation, which can be vulnerable to incorrect peer influence and biased consen-sus. Moreover, the agents themselves remain static, as their underlying reasoning skills do not evolve across tasks. In this paper, we introduce AgentPSO , a particle-swarm-inspired framework for evolving multi-agent reasoning skills. AgentPSO treats each agent as a particle-like reasoner whose state is a natural-language skill and whose velocity is a semantic update direction, iteratively moving agents toward stronger skill states to improve both individual and collective reasoning perfor-mance. Across training iterations, each agent updates its skill by combining its previous velocity, personal-best skill, global-best skill, and a self-reflective direc-tion derived from peer reasoning trajectories. This enables agents to learn reusable reasoning behaviors from both their own experiences and the strongest skills discov-ered by the population, without updating the parameters of the backbone language model. Experiments on mathematical and general reasoning benchmarks show that AgentPSO improves over static single-agent skills and test-time-only multi-agent reasoning baselines. The evolved skills further transfer across benchmarks and to another backbone model, suggesting that AgentPSO captures reusable reasoning procedures rather than merely optimizing benchmark-specific prompts. Code is open-sourced at https://github.com/HYUNMIN-HWANG/AgentPSO/ 

## 1 Introduction 

“Groups are remarkably intelligent, and are often smarter than the smartest people in them. ”— James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds [36] Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable progress in solving complex reasoning problems [ 31 , 1, 5 , 9], yet their performance remains highly sensitive to how they are prompted and what reasoning skills they are instructed to use [ 41 , 50 , 46 , 39 , 30 , 51 ]. As manually identifying optimal prompts and agent skills is labor-intensive, recent work has increasingly explored methods that automatically improve prompts, policies, or reasoning behaviors through iterative refinement [ 32 ,54 , 45 , 21 , 6 , 12 , 2, 52 ]. However, most prompt optimization and self-evolution methods remain centered on improving a single agent, prompt, or pipeline, rather than evolving a population of agent-specific skills. A single agent typically improves by reflecting on its own outputs, revising its own prompt, or accumulating its own experience, which can limit exploratory diversity and lead to local optima constrained by the model’s inherent biases and internal knowledge [18]. 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.08704v1 [cs.AI] 9 May 2026

This motivates the use of multi-agent systems, where multiple agents provide diverse reasoning perspectives beyond the limitations of a single agent’s self-contained evolution. By critiquing one another and exposing alternative solution paths, multi-agent systems enable broader exploration of the reasoning space [ 10 , 25 , 28 , 27 ]. However, existing multi-agent paradigms largely rely on inference-time collaboration, such as multi-round debate, which can be vulnerable to incorrect peer influence, biased consensus, and substantial computational overhead [ 19 , 8, 43 ]. Crucially, while these methods improve the outcome of the current discussion, they do not evolve the agents themselves or enable them to internalize reusable reasoning skills from prior interactions. Memory-based approaches partially address this limitation by storing and retrieving past lessons from previous interactions [ 29 , 26 ]. However, these methods primarily reuse externalized experiences or task-specific lessons at inference time, rather than directly updating the agents’ underlying reasoning skills. As a result, their ability to transfer general reasoning behaviors across benchmarks remains limited. This motivates the central question of our work: Can multi-agent systems iteratively evolve their underlying reasoning skills through collective interaction, rather than merely refining the output for a single instance? To address this, we propose AgentPSO , a novel framework that treats multi-agent evolution as a dynamic optimization problem inspired by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [ 20 ]. In our framework, each agent is treated as a particle, and its velocity v captures the direction of skill refinement. At each iteration, agents update their skills by leveraging both their personal-best skill p

and the global-best skill g. Through this population-guided update, AgentPSO exploits strong skills discovered by the swarm while maintaining diverse, agent-specific improvement trajectories. However, directly applying the standard PSO rule to agent evolution is insufficient, as agents may move toward high-performing skill states without acquiring the reasoning principles that make them effective [ 13 , 15 , 48 ]. AgentPSO, therefore, introduces a self-reflective direction d into the update rule. Instead of simply copying the prompt or skill of a stronger peer, each agent analyzes peer reasoning trajectories and extracts reusable lessons from their problem-solving processes. This reflection mechanism allows agents to internalize procedural reasoning patterns that generalize beyond individual task instances. Across iterations, the swarm evolves from a set of heterogeneous initial agents into a collectively stronger population. At test time, the evolved agents solve problems independently and aggregate their answers through majority voting, achieving strong performance without costly multi-round interaction. We evaluate AgentPSO on mathematical and general reasoning benchmarks, including DeepMath and BigBenchHard. Our experiments show that AgentPSO outperforms single-agent prompting methods and debate-based multi-agent baselines. Further analyses show that the evolved skills transfer across benchmarks, improve progressively over iterations, and benefit substantially from the self-reflective direction. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce AgentPSO , a PSO-inspired framework that evolves multi-agent reasoning skills by updating agents through personal-best, global-best, and self-reflective directions. • We demonstrate that AgentPSO yields persistent evolution of agent capabilities, achieving stronger performance than single-agent and debate-based multi-agent baselines without requiring costly test-time debate. • We demonstrate that evolved skills transfer across benchmarks, indicating that AgentPSO learns general reasoning behaviors rather than merely memorizing task-specific knowledge. 

## 2 Related Works 

Multi-Agent Collaboration Approaches. Individual language models are often limited in their ability to explore diverse reasoning trajectories [ 18 ], motivating multi-agent collaboration in which agents exchange information and refine their solutions collectively. Prior work has shown that multi-agent debate can improve reasoning by enabling agents to critique one another and expand the space of possible solutions [ 10 , 28 ]. To make such collaboration more reliable, later studies introduced richer interaction and evaluation schemes, including confidence-aware interaction [ 25 ], multidimensional assessment [ 11 ], cross-agent reward signals [ 44 ], and tournament-style comparison [ 14 ]. Other approaches augment collaboration with external memory, allowing agents to retrieve lessons from prior debates for future tasks [ 27 , 29 ]. Despite these advances, existing methods still face two major 2e

> 𝒔 𝒊
> 𝟎
> 𝒑 𝒊
> 𝒕
> 𝒈 𝒕
> 𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕
> 𝒗 𝒊
> 𝒕

AgentPSO                       

> 𝒅 𝒊
> 𝒕 =Reflect (𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝑶 𝒊
> 𝒕 )
> 3Self -reflective direction
> 4Evaluate and update
> personal best skill
> global best skill
> Agent Skill
> …
> 𝒔 𝟏
> 𝒕
> 𝒔 𝟐
> 𝒕
> 𝒔 𝑵
> 𝒕
> …
> Train
> Batch
> Current skill Personal best
> Global best Other skills
> Agent 1
> Agent 2
> …
> Agent 𝑖
> 𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕
> Current skill Peer Observation
> 𝑶 𝒊
> 𝒕
> Validation
> Batch 𝒗 𝒊
> 𝒕 +𝟏 =VelocityUpdate (𝒗 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝒅 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝒑 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝒈 𝒕 )
> PSO -like update
> 𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕 +𝟏 =SkillUpdate (𝒔 𝒊
> 𝒕 ,𝒗 𝒊
> 𝒕 +𝟏 )…
> 𝒑 𝒊
> 𝒕
> 𝒈 𝒕
> 2Peer Observation 𝑶 𝒊
> 𝒕
> 1Independent solving

Figure 1: Overview of AgentPSO. Each agent independently solves the training batch with its current skill, producing answers and reasoning traces. Peer observations summarize other agents’ reasoning traces and correctness, from which each agent derives a self-reflective direction for skill improvement. This direction is combined with guidance from the personal-best and global-best skills through a PSO-like update. limitations. First, debate-centric collaboration remains vulnerable to negative peer influence [ 19 ,8, 43 ] and incurs substantial inference-time overhead. Second, these systems remain largely static, since agents may interact during problem solving but their underlying capabilities are not directly improved across tasks. By contrast, we formulate multi-agent collaboration as a process of agent skill evolution, where agents improve by learning from one another’s reasoning trajectories. 

Self-Evolution in Language Models. Recent research has increasingly aimed to make language models self-evolving by iteratively adapting their behavior to better fit a target task [ 4]. Early efforts focus on prompting, where task-relevant reasoning depends heavily on the prompts provided to the model [ 41 , 30 , 22 , 33 ]. Subsequent works therefore explore prompt optimization to automatically discover more effective prompts [ 32 , 54 , 45 , 21 , 6, 12 , 2 ]. More recent studies further extend this line of research from prompt optimization to the iterative refinement of reasoning structures, workflows, agent architectures, and externalized skills through feedback and self-improvement [ 53 , 35 , 17 , 47 ,44 , 3, 42 , 40 , 52 ]. Our method follows this direction, but focuses on population-level multi-agent skill evolution rather than optimizing a single component, such as a prompt, agent, or pipeline. Specifically, each agent updates its own skill based on its current state, a self-reflective update direction, its personal-best skill, and the global-best skill discovered across the population. 

Particle Swarm Optimization. We interpret multi-agent skill evolution through the lens of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [ 20 ], in which each particle is updated based on its current state, its personal best, and the swarm’s global best. PSO has been widely applied to diverse optimization problems, including in language model optimization [ 34 , 15 ]. We extend this perspective to multi-agent evolution by treating each agent as a particle-like reasoner with an evolving skill state. Each agent is thus guided by both its own personal-best skill and the strongest skill discovered across the population, enabling improvement at both the individual and collective levels. However, standard PSO alone can be limited on complex search problems, where effective exploration remains difficult [ 13 ,48 ]. To address this limitation, our method extends the PSO-style update with a self-reflective 

semantic direction term by exploiting LLM’s capability, encouraging broader exploration while steering agents toward better skill configurations. 

## 3 Problem Setup 

We consider a population of N -LLM agents A = {A1, A 2, . . . , A N } that jointly evolve their reason-ing skills over problem-solving iterations. At iteration t, each agent Ai has a current skill state sti ∈ S ,where S denotes the space of valid skill states. A skill state specifies how the agent should approach reasoning problems, and different skill states can induce different solution strategies and reasoning 3Table 1: Correspondence between standard PSO and AgentPSO . AgentPSO preserves the PSO update structure, but replaces numerical vector arithmetic with natural-language semantic update operators.                               

> Standard PSO [20] AgentPSO
> State Continuous position xtiskill state sti
> Direction Vector velocity vtiSemantic velocity vti
> Velocity update ωv ti+c1r1(pti−xti) + c2r2(gt−xti)VelocityUpdate( vti, d ti, s ti, p ti, g t)
> State update xti+vt+1
> iSkillUpdate( sti, v t+1
> i)

trajectories. The agents are initialized with diverse skill instructions, allowing the population to start from multiple reasoning strategies rather than a single shared prompt. We define F (s) as the validation accuracy obtained when an agent solves a validation batch using skill s. Our objective is to obtain a population of high-performing skill states {s∗ 

> i

}Ni=1 that improve both individual agent performance and collective prediction. We optimize only the skill instructions, without updating the internal parameters of the backbone LLM. Because the optimized object is a reusable instruction rather than a task-specific answer, the resulting skills are expected to improve performance on unseen problems. During optimization, training batches are used to generate peer observations and update directions, whereas validation batches are used to select personal-best and global-best skills. Our goal is not to optimize each skill independently. If each agent only updates its own instruction, the search remains limited to that agent’s local trajectory. Instead, we use the population as a source of comparative evidence. When multiple agents solve the same batch, their reasoning traces reveal which strategies succeed, which fail, and which reasoning behaviors are useful across problems. Thus, skill evolution is driven not only by an agent’s own experience, but also by behavioral evidence extracted from peer trajectories. To perform this population-based skill search, we adopt a swarm-inspired formulation. Each agent maintains its current skill, its own search history, the personal-best skill it has found so far, and the global-best skill found by the population. In addition, each agent uses peer reasoning trajectories to infer how its current skill should be revised. Under this view, each agent Ai can be interpreted as a particle whose position is its current skill state sti. Unlike standard particle-based optimization, however, this position is not a numerical vector but a natural-language instruction. 

## 4 AgentPSO 

AgentPSO is a PSO-inspired framework for multi-agent reasoning skill evolution. It preserves the core update structure of PSO: each agent revises its current state by combining its previous update direction, its own best past state, and the best state discovered by the population. AgentPSO adapts this structure to natural-language skill optimization by treating each skill instruction as a particle state and each textual revision direction as a semantic velocity. Table 1 summarizes this correspondence. Each training iteration follows four steps: (i) All agents solve the same training batch independently using their current skills. (ii) Each agent observes the answer correctness and the reasoning traces produced by the population and derives a self-reflective update direction. (iii) Each agent combines this direction with its previous semantic velocity, its personal-best skill, and the global-best skill to produce a new semantic velocity, which is then used to rewrite its current skill. (iv) The updated skills are evaluated on a validation batch, and the validation scores are used to update the personal-best and global-best skills. We visualize the overall pipeline of AgentPSO in Figure 1. 

4.1 Independent Solving and Peer Observation 

At iteration t, all agents first solve the same training batch independently using their current skills 

sti without inter-agent communication. This independent solving phase allows us to evaluate the reasoning behavior induced by each skill before it is affected by peer interaction. In contrast, debate-based methods allow agents to exchange arguments during inference, which entangles their outputs and makes it harder to attribute the final result to a particular skill. In addition, AgentPSO maintains this non-interactive design at test time. The evolved agents solve problems in parallel and aggregate 4Algorithm 1 AgentPSO 

Require: Validation accuracy F , initial skills {s0 

> i

}Ni=1 , iterations T , margin ϵ 

> 1:

{v0 

> i

, p 0 

> i

} ← { “” , s 0 

> i

} for all i 

> 2:

g0 ← s0 

> j⋆

, where j⋆ = arg max i F (s0 

> i

) 

> 3:

for t = 0 to T − 1 do  

> 4:

Each agent solves the training batch using sti 

> 5:

for i = 1 to N do  

> 6:

Construct peer observation Oti 

> 7:

dti ← Reflect( sti, O ti ) 

> 8:

vt+1  

> i

← VelocityUpdate( vti , d ti, s ti, p ti, g t) 

> 9:

st+1  

> i

← SkillUpdate( sti, v t+1  

> i

) 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Evaluate {st+1  

> i

} on a validation batch  

> 12:

Update each pt+1  

> i

with st+1  

> i

only if its validation score improves by more than ϵ 

> 13:

Update gt+1 only when it improves global-best validation score by more than ϵ 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return {pTi }Ni=1 and gT

their answers by majority voting, avoiding the multi-round communication overhead of debate-based inference. After all agents complete the batch, we construct a peer observation Oti for each agent. This observation contains the agent’s own output and the peer agents’ outputs, including final answers, reasoning traces, and correctness labels, while excluding the peer agents’ skill instructions. This design encourages agents to learn from peer reasoning behaviors rather than copying peer skill texts. Consequently, each agent can identify what made another trajectory successful ( e.g. , checking intermediate assumptions or decomposing the problem more carefully), and use these observations to improve its own skill. 

4.2 PSO-Inspired Skill Evolution 

Having constructed the peer observations, the next step is to update each agent’s skill by integrating its own experience with the population’s discoveries. To structure this integration, AgentPSO follows the update process based on the mechanics of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). Standard PSO maintains, for each particle, its current position xti, velocity vti , personal-best position 

pti, and swarm-level global-best position gt. It updates each particle in two stages: first, it updates the velocity using the previous velocity, the particle’s personal-best position, and the swarm’s global-best position; then, it updates the particle’s position by moving it according to the new velocity. However, applying this update structure to natural-language skills requires an additional source of direction. In continuous PSO, the vector differences pti − xti and gt − xti provide explicit directions toward better positions. In natural-language skill space, however, knowing that a personal-best or global-best skill performed well does not directly explain which reasoning behavior should be added, removed, or strengthened. Without such behavioral guidance, the update may collapse into imitating the best skill state rather than learning a reusable reasoning principle. To address this, AgentPSO introduces a self-reflective direction dti derived from the peer observation 

Oti :

dti = Reflect( sti, O ti ). (1) This direction summarizes how the current skill should improve based on the agent’s own behavior relative to peer behavior on the same batch. Thus, dti provides a concrete behavioral update direction without directly copying another agent’s skill instruction. AgentPSO retains the PSO two-stage update within the natural-language skill space. For agent Ai,the current skill sti functions as the particle position, representing the candidate skill being optimized. The semantic velocity vti acts as the particle velocity, representing the textual revision direction applied at the next step. The personal-best skill pti and the global-best skill gt correspond to the best skill previously found by Ai and the best skill discovered by the population, respectively. 5The updated semantic velocity is generated as 

vt+1  

> i

= VelocityUpdate  vti , d ti, s ti, p ti, g t. (2) Here, VelocityUpdate replaces numerical vector differences with a semantic update operator. Given the previous velocity, the self-reflective direction, the current skill, and the personal-best and global-best skill references, the LLM synthesizes a new textual velocity that describes how the current skill should be revised. Finally, AgentPSO performs the analogue of the PSO position update by rewriting the current skill according to the updated velocity: 

st+1  

> i

= SkillUpdate  sti, v t+1 

> i

. (3) Rather than adding a numerical velocity vector to a numerical position vector, SkillUpdate seman-tically rewrites the current skill. The resulting skill is evolved from the agent’s current skill rather than generated from scratch, while remaining applicable to future problems beyond the current batch. Detailed prompt templates for Reflect , VelocityUpdate , and SkillUpdate are provided in Appendix F. 

4.3 Validation-Based Best-State Selection 

After generating the updated skills, AgentPSO evaluates each st+1  

> i

on a validation batch using the validation accuracy F . If F (st+1  

> i

) exceeds the score of the current personal-best skill pti by more than ϵ, we set pt+1  

> i

= st+1  

> i

; otherwise, we keep pt+1  

> i

= pti. Likewise, the global-best skill is updated only if the strongest updated skill improves the current global-best score by more than ϵ. This margin 

ϵ prevents small or noisy fluctuations from immediately replacing previously effective skills. At initialization, the semantic velocities are set to empty update directions, v0 

> i

= “” . The personal-best skills are initialized as p0 

> i

= s0 

> i

, and the initial global-best skill g0 is selected as the highest-scoring initial skill on the validation batch. Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall procedure. 

## 5 Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate AgentPSO on five benchmarks covering mathematical and general reasoning. (1) For mathematical reasoning, we use DeepMath [ 16 ], MATH [ 24 ], AIME25 [ 49 ], and Minerva [ 23 ], which require multi-step reasoning, symbolic manipulation, and numerical problem solving. The resulting optimized agent skills are evaluated on the DeepMath test set and further applied to out-of-distribution mathematical benchmarks, including MATH, AIME25, and Minerva. (2) For general reasoning, we use BigBenchHard (BBH) [ 37 ], a challenging benchmark composed of 23 diverse reasoning tasks, including logical, symbolic, commonsense, and multi-step reasoning. We randomly split BBH into training, validation, and test sets and report the final performance on the BBH test split. Further details on the datasets and splits are provided in Appendix B. 

Baselines. We compare AgentPSO with baselines from three main categories. The implementation details of all baselines are described in Appendix C: • Vanilla single-agent methods. We include Chain-of-Thought Prompting (CoT) [ 41 ] and Step-Back Prompting [50] as basic single-agent reasoning baselines. • Advanced single-agent methods. We include Self-Refine [ 30 ], Reflection [ 33 ], Self-Consistency [ 39 ], and Tree-of-Thoughts [ 46 ], which improve single-agent reasoning through refinement, reflection, sampling, or structured search. • Multi-agent methods. We compare against MAD [ 10 ], MoA [ 38 ], and DMAD [ 28 ], which leverage multiple agents to improve reasoning through debate, aggregation, or diversity. 

Implementation Details. We implement AgentPSO with ChatGPT (gpt-5.4-mini) as the backbone model. All experiments use four agents initialized with different CoT-based reasoning methods. We optimize agent skill states for 100 training samples over 10 iterations, without updating backbone model parameters. Detailed hyperparameter settings and prompts are provided in Appendices A.2 6Table 2: Comparison with single-agent and multi-agent baselines. All reported values denote accuracy, and AgentPSO achieves the best average performance across all benchmarks.                                                                    

> Category Method DeepMath MATH AIME25 Minerva BigBenchHard Avg.
> Vanilla Single-Agent Chain-of-Thought 68.00 90.40 40.00 38.60 85.50 64.50 Step-Back Prompting 64.50 90.40 50.00 38.60 82.50 65.20 Advanced Single-Agent Self-Refine 70.50 91.60 53.33 34.56 82.50 66.50 Reflection 69.50 90.80 40.00 38.24 83.00 64.31 Self-Consistency 69.50 88.80 60.00 27.21 86.50 66.40 ToT 63.00 81.60 50.00 31.99 78.50 61.02 Multi-Agent MAD 69.00 96.00 56.67 32.72 84.00 67.68 MoA 70.00 95.60 56.67 27.57 77.50 65.47 DMAD 72.00 95.00 56.67 35.29 85.00 68.79
> AgentPSO 79.50 94.60 56.67 42.65 86.50 71.98

Figure 2: Progressive improvement of AgentPSO-evolved skills. (Left) Evolved personal-best and global-best skills outperform the initial skills on average. (Right) DeepMath performance improves over iterations, showing gradual refinement of the agent population. and F. At each validation step, we evaluate the current agent skills on 20 validation samples. To reduce overfitting to a single small validation subset, we rotate validation subsets during optimization, as described in Appendix B. 

## 6 Main Results 

We report three evaluation metrics. Accuracy denotes the majority-vote accuracy across agents. Pass@ k indicates whether at least one of the k agents produces the correct answer. Avg@ k denotes the average accuracy of the k individual agents. 

6.1 AgentPSO Improves Multi-Agent Reasoning through Skill Evolution Main performance comparison. Table 2 compares AgentPSO with vanilla single-agent, advanced single-agent, and multi-agent baselines across mathematical and general reasoning benchmarks. AgentPSO achieves the best average performance across the five benchmarks, reaching an average accuracy of 71.98%. Specifically, AgentPSO is initialized from the same reasoning skills used by the single-agent baselines. After skill evolution, AgentPSO outperforms all of these initial agents, improving the average accuracy from 64.50% for Chain-of-Thought and 66.50% for Self-Refine to 71.98%. It also outperforms static multi-agent baselines such as MAD, MoA, and DMAD, whose average scores are 67.68%, 65.47%, and 68.79%, respectively. These results suggest that evolving agent skills across tasks provides benefits beyond both fixed single-agent prompting and inference-time collaboration among static agents. Although MAD performs slightly better on MATH, suggesting that inference-time debate can help in some settings, AgentPSO achieves stronger overall performance without costly multi-round debate at test time. 

Progressive improvement of evolved agent skills. Figure 2 (Left) compares the initial agent skills with the learned personal-best and global-best skills. After optimization, both the average personal-best agents and the global-best agent outperform the initial agents on average. Notably, the global-best agent achieves the strongest single-agent performance, indicating that AgentPSO successfully moves the agent population toward a more effective skill configuration during training. 7Table 3: Cross-benchmark transfer of learned reasoning skills.                       

> Test Dataset Method Accuracy Pass@ kAvg@ k
> DeepMath MAD 69.00 70.50 68.00 AgentPSO DeepMath 79.50 87.00 72.75 AgentPSO BBH 75.00 81.00 66.13 BBH MAD 84.00 87.00 81.88 AgentPSO BBH 86.50 92.00 86.00 AgentPSO DeepMath 85.50 90.50 82.75

Table 4: Cross-model transfer of AgentPSO-learned skills from GPT to Claude.                                     

> Method DeepMath MATH AIME25 Minerva BBH Avg.
> Chain-of-Thought 60.00 90.60 30.00 36.03 47.50 52.83 Step-Back Prompting 63.50 89.80 36.67 36.40 51.00 55.47 Self-Refine 61.00 91.60 30.00 34.56 50.00 53.43 Reflection 60.00 90.20 36.67 35.66 55.00 55.51
> AgentPSO (GPT →Claude) 70.50 91.40 40.00 33.46 56.50 58.37

Figure 2 (Right) shows how performance changes across optimization iterations. Rather than quickly converging to a local optimum, AgentPSO gradually improves the agent population through repeated updates. As the iterations progress, the collective performance of the saved personal-best agents steadily improves, with the final iterations achieving the strongest results. This trend suggests that AgentPSO progressively refines agent skills over iterations. 

6.2 AgentPSO Learns Transferable Reasoning Skills Cross-benchmark transfer. Table 3 examines whether AgentPSO-learned skills transfer across benchmarks. We denote AgentPSO skills optimized on BigBenchHard and DeepMath as AgentPSO BBH and AgentPSO DeepMath , respectively. Although skills optimized on the target bench-mark achieve the strongest performance, cross-trained AgentPSO skills still outperform the static MAD baseline on both DeepMath and BBH. This trend is observed not only in majority-vote accuracy but also in pass@ k, suggesting that the evolved agent population retains useful reasoning behaviors even when transferred to a different benchmark. These results suggest that AgentPSO does not merely fit skills to the source optimization benchmark, but can learn reasoning procedures that generalize across reasoning tasks. 

Cross-model transfer. Table 4 evaluates whether the skills learned by AgentPSO transfer across different backbone LLMs. We directly apply the best skill optimized with GPT to Claude (claude-haiku-4-5-20251001), without additional training or adaptation. The single-agent baselines report the performance of Claude using the initial skill prompts, including Chain-of-Thought, Step-Back Prompting, Self-Refine, and Reflection. In contrast, AgentPSO (GPT →Claude) reports the per-formance of Claude when using the GPT-optimized AgentPSO skill. Overall, the GPT-optimized AgentPSO skill improves Claude’s average accuracy to 58.37%, outperforming all initial skill base-lines. These results provide preliminary evidence that AgentPSO-learned skills can improve another backbone LLM. 

6.3 Analysis Qualitative analysis of skill evolution. We qualitatively examine how AgentPSO updates the velocities and skills of individual agents. Figure 4 and 5 in Appendix E.2 show the evolution of the agent initialized with a Self-Refine skill. In the early stage, the updates mainly improve answer formatting, such as checking the required output type, using canonical notation, and verifying edge cases. These changes are primarily driven by the self-reflective direction, which helps the agent correct recurring formatting and validation errors. In the middle stage, the agent incorporates guidance from the global-best skill, adding higher-level reasoning behaviors such as problem-type classification and method selection. By the later stage, the skill becomes a hybrid policy that preserves the original Self-Refine structure while integrating global-best abstraction and feedback-derived validation behavior. As a result, AgentPSO transforms an initially simple skill into a more robust and general reasoning skill. 

Compatibility with multi-agent inference methods. Table 5 evaluates whether the skills optimized by AgentPSO can be reused within existing multi-agent inference methods. Instead of using the original static agent prompts, we plug AgentPSO-trained skills into MAD and MoA. For MAD, all agents are instantiated with the global-best skill discovered by AgentPSO, while for MoA, we use different personal-best skills to preserve diversity among proposer agents. Across both MAD and MoA, replacing the original prompts with AgentPSO-trained skills improves performance on most benchmarks. This suggests that AgentPSO learns reusable agent skills that are not limited to a single inference procedure, but can be integrated into different multi-agent reasoning frameworks. 8Table 5: Compatibility with multi-agent inference meth-ods. AgentPSO-trained skills are plugged into MAD and MoA at test time.                

> Inference Method DeepMath Minerva BigBenchHard
> MAD 69.0 32.72 84.0 AgentPSO + MAD 76.5 36.40 84.0 MoA 70.0 27.57 77.5 AgentPSO + MoA 72.5 29.78 82.5

Table 6: Effect of the number of agents. 

This analysis examines how agent diver-sity affects collective reasoning.                

> # Agents DeepMath Accuracy Pass@ kAvg@ kk= 2 67.00 75.00 66.00
> k= 3 74.50 79.50 66.67
> k= 4 79.50 87.00 72.75

6.4 Ablation Study Effect of the number of agents. Table 6 analyzes how the number of agents affects AgentPSO performance on DeepMath. Overall, performance improves as the number of agents increases, suggesting that agent diversity is an important factor in AgentPSO. With a small number of agents, the system has fewer reasoning trajectories to compare and fewer candidate skills to update, limiting the diversity of reasoning behaviors that the agents can learn. As more agents are added, AgentPSO can leverage a broader set of reasoning behaviors, leading to stronger majority-voting accuracy and higher pass@ k. This suggests that increasing the population size helps the swarm discover and preserve more effective reasoning skills. Table 7: Ablation study on the update components of AgentPSO on Deep-Math.                                        

> VelocityUpdate Input Acc. Pass@ kvi⊕si⊕di⊕pi⊕g79.50 87.00
> vi⊕si⊕pi⊕g72.50 80.50
> vi⊕si⊕pi73.00 80.00
> vi⊕si⊕g72.00 81.50
> vi⊕si⊕di76.00 81.50

Contribution of self-reflective direction di. Table 7 highlights the importance of the self-reflective direction 

di in AgentPSO. When di is removed from the full up-date rule, performance drops substantially, indicating that standard PSO-style guidance alone is insufficient for fully optimizing agent skills. Personal-best guidance ( pi) and global-best guidance ( g) provide useful signals by preserv-ing and propagating successful skills, but they are most effective when combined with di. In contrast, the variant that combines the velocity with the self-reflective direction achieves stronger performance than the variants based only on personal-best or global-best guidance. This suggests that feedback derived from peer reasoning trajectories provides a more direct and informative signal for improving agent skills. Additional validation trajectories comparing AgentPSO with and without 

di are provided in Appendix D.1. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We proposed AgentPSO , a PSO-inspired framework that evolves multi-agent reasoning skills in natural-language skill space. Beyond the standard PSO components of personal-best and global-best guidance, AgentPSO introduces a self-reflective direction that allows agents to extract reusable lessons from peer reasoning trajectories. By combining these update signals, AgentPSO refines each agent’s skill without updating the backbone model parameters. The learned skills exhibit strong transferability, generalizing across both reasoning benchmarks and backbone LLMs. This suggests that AgentPSO learns reusable reasoning behaviors rather than task- or model-specific prompting patterns. Overall, our results show that multi-agent collaboration can serve not only as an inference-time mechanism for answer refinement, but also as a model-parameter-free process for evolving reusable reasoning skills at the population level. This may improve the reliability and efficiency of reasoning systems by enabling agents to acquire reusable reasoning behaviors without requiring model parameter updates. 

Limitations. The current experiments focus on reasoning benchmarks. Although AgentPSO avoids parameter updates, it requires additional training-time LLM calls to evolve the agent population. Another limitation is that evolved agent skills may amplify incorrect reasoning patterns if the feedback, peer observations, or validation signals are flawed. Moreover, AgentPSO optimizes reasoning skills 9rather than acquiring new domain knowledge. Future work may combine AgentPSO with stronger verification or retrieval mechanisms, especially for knowledge-intensive domains. 10 References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [2] Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [3] Mohammad Almansoori, Komal Kumar, and Hisham Cholakkal. Self-evolving multi-agent simulations for realistic clinical interactions. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 2025. [4] Huan ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, Hongru Wang, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang, Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Cheng Qian, Zhenghailong Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A survey of self-evolving agents: On path to artificial super intelligence, 2025. [5] Anthropic. Models overview. https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/about-claude/ models/overview , 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-06. [6] Nafew Azim, Abrar Ur Alam, Hasan Bin Omar, Abdullah Mohammad Muntasir Adnan Jami, Jawad Ibn Ahad, Muhammad Rafsan Kabir, Md. Ismail Hossain, Fuad Rahman, Moham-mad Ruhul Amin, Shafin Rahman, and Nabeel Mohammed. AutoDSPy: Automating modular prompt design with reinforcement learning for small and large language models. In Saloni Pot-dar, Lina Rojas-Barahona, and Sebastien Montella, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 2881–2896, Suzhou (China), November 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [7] Hanjie Chen, Zhouxiang Fang, Yash Singla, and Mark Dredze. Benchmarking large language models on answering and explaining challenging medical questions, 2024. [8] Yu Cui, Hang Fu, Haibin Zhang, Licheng Wang, and Cong Zuo. Free-MAD: Consensus-free multi-agent debate, 2026. [9] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning, 2025. [10] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improv-ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325 , 2023. [11] Zhaopeng Feng, Jiayuan Su, Jiamei Zheng, Jiahan Ren, Yan Zhang, Jian Wu, Hongwei Wang, and Zuozhu Liu. M-MAD: Multidimensional multi-agent debate for advanced machine transla-tion evaluation. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7084–7107, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [12] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Sunil Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution, 2024. [13] Daniel Freitas, Luis G. Lopes, and Fernando Morgado-Dias. Particle swarm optimisation: A historical review up to the current developments. Entropy , 22(3):362, 2020. [14] Lingyue Fu, Xin Ding, Yaoming Zhu, Shao Zhang, Lin Qiu, Weiwen Liu, Weinan Zhang, Xuezhi Cao, Xunliang Cai, Jiaxin Ding, and Yong Yu. CATArena: Evaluation of LLM agents through iterative tournament competitions, 2026. 11 [15] Ahmed G. Gad. Particle swarm optimization algorithm and its applications: A systematic review. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering , 29:2531–2561, 2022. [16] Zhiwei He, Tian Liang, Jiahao Xu, Qiuzhi Liu, Xingyu Chen, Yue Wang, Linfeng Song, Dian Yu, Zhenwen Liang, Wenxuan Wang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Rui Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Deepmath-103k: A large-scale, challenging, decontaminated, and verifiable mathematical dataset for advancing reasoning. 2025. [17] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 , 2024. [18] Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song, and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01798 , 2023. [19] Lars Benedikt Kaesberg, Jonas Becker, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, and Bela Gipp. Voting or consensus? decision-making in multi-agent debate. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 11640–11671, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [20] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of ICNN’95 -International Conference on Neural Networks , volume 4, pages 1942–1948 vol.4, 1995. [21] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan A, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [22] Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [23] Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quan-titative reasoning problems with language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:3843–3857, 2022. [24] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 , 2023. [25] Zijie Lin and Bryan Hooi. Enhancing multi-agent debate system performance via confidence expression. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 6453–6471, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [26] Shuai Ling, Lizi Liao, Dongmei Jiang, and Weili Guan. MeMAD: Structured memory of debates for enhanced multi-agent reasoning. In Second Conference on Language Modeling ,2025. [27] Tongxuan Liu, Xingyu Wang, Weizhe Huang, Wenjiang Xu, Yuting Zeng, Lei Jiang, Hailong Yang, and Jing Li. Groupdebate: Enhancing the efficiency of multi-agent debate using group discussion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14051 , 2024. [28] Yexiang Liu, Jie Cao, Zekun Li, Ran He, and Tieniu Tan. Breaking mental set to improve reasoning through diverse multi-agent debate. In ICLR , 2025. [29] Yuanzhe Liu, Ryan Deng, Tim Kaler, Xuhao Chen, Charles E Leiserson, Yao Ma, and Jie Chen. Lessons learned: A multi-agent framework for code LLMs to learn and improve. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 , 2025. 12 [30] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Sean Welleck, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Shashank Gupta, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback, 2023. [31] OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.5. https://openai.com/ko-KR/index/ introducing-gpt-5-5/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-6. [32] Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based instruction search for prompting large language models. 2022. [33] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652, 2023. [34] Yamato Shinohara, Jinglue Xu, Tianshui Li, and Hitoshi Iba. Large language models as particle swarm optimizers. In 2025 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , pages 1–4, 2025. [35] Jinwei Su, Yinghui Xia, Yiqun Duan, Jun Du, Jianuo Huang, Tianyu Shi, and Lewei He. Debflow: Automating agent creation via agent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23781 , 2025. [36] James Surowiecki. The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations . Doubleday, New York, 2004. [37] Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, , and Jason Wei. Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261 , 2022. [38] Junlin Wang, Jue WANG, Ben Athiwaratkun, Ce Zhang, and James Zou. Mixture-of-agents enhances large language model capabilities. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [39] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [40] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [41] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [42] Tianxin Wei, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Zhankui He, Yuanchen Bei, Xuying Ning, Mengting Ai, Yunzhe Li, Jingrui He, Ed H. Chi, Chi Wang, Shuo Chen, Fernando Pereira, Wang-Cheng Kang, and Derek Zhiyuan Cheng. Evo-memory: Benchmarking llm agent test-time learning with self-evolving memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20857 , 2025. [43] Zhiyuan Weng, Guikun Chen, and Wenguan Wang. Do as we do, not as you think: the conformity of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13381 , 2025. [44] Xiangyuan Xue, Yifan Zhou, Guibin Zhang, Zaibin Zhang, Yijiang Li, Chen Zhang, Zhenfei Yin, Philip Torr, Wanli Ouyang, and Lei Bai. Comas: Co-evolving multi-agent systems via interaction rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08529 , 2025. [45] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [46] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822, 2023. 13 [47] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [48] Kai Zhang, Qiujun Huang, and Yimin Zhang. Enhancing comprehensive learning particle swarm optimization with local optima topology. Information Sciences , 471:1–18, 2019. [49] Yifan Zhang and Team Math-AI. American invitational mathematics examination (aime) 2025, 2025. [50] Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [51] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [52] Huichi Zhou, Siyuan Guo, Anjie Liu, Zhongwei Yu, Ziqin Gong, Bowen Zhao, Zhixun Chen, Menglong Zhang, Yihang Chen, Jinsong Li, et al. Memento-skills: Let agents design agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18743 , 2026. [53] Pei Zhou, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, Swaroop Mishra, and Huaixiu Steven Zheng. Self-discover: Large language models self-compose reasoning structures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03620 , 2024. [54] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [55] Yuxin Zuo, Shang Qu, Yifei Li, Zhangren Chen, Xuekai Zhu, Ermo Hua, Kaiyan Zhang, Ning Ding, and Bowen Zhou. Medxpertqa: Benchmarking expert-level medical reasoning and understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18362 , 2025. 14 A Experimental Details 

Table 8: Hyperparameter settings for AgentPSO.           

> Hyperparameter Value
> Number of agents 4Number of iterations 10 Training pool size 100 Validation pool size 100 Training batch size 10 Validation batch size 20 Epsilon margin 0.01 Maximum velocity length 200 words / 300 tokens Maximum skill length 1200 words / 800 tokens

Table 9: Dataset statistics used in our exper-iments.                   

> Dataset Train Validation Test
> DeepMath [16] 100 100 200 BigBenchHard [37] 100 100 200 MATH [24] ––500 AIME25 [49] ––30 Minerva [23] ––272

A.1 Instruction of Agents 

We initialize the agent population with four distinct reasoning skill modules. Each agent is assigned one initial instruction that encourages a different reasoning behavior. These initial skills are used to induce diversity among agents before the optimization process begins. The full instructions are as follows. • Agent 1: Chain of Thought. Solve the problem step by step. 

• Agent 2: Step-Back Prompting. Before solving, step back and identify the general principle or problem type. 

• Agent 3: Self-Refine. First solve the problem, then review and improve the solution. 

• Agent 4: Reflection. Solve while reflecting on assumptions and possible failure points. 

A.2 Details of Hyperparameters 

Since AgentPSO operates in natural-language skill space rather than a numeric vector space, we do not sample stochastic PSO coefficients. Instead, all natural-language update components are incorporated with equal weight. The primary hyperparameters of AgentPSO control the number of agents, the sizes of the training and validation pools, the batch sizes used during optimization, the epsilon margin for updating best skills, and the maximum lengths of generated velocity and skill descriptions. Table 8 summarizes the hyperparameter settings. 

## B Datasets 

Table 9 summarizes the dataset splits used in our experiments. For DeepMath and BigBenchHard (BBH), we use 100 training samples, 100 validation samples, and 200 test samples. The training split is used for skill updates, the validation split is used for personal-best and global-best selection, and the test split is used only for final evaluation. To reduce API cost and computational overhead, we randomly sample 200 test examples, following prior multi-agent reasoning studies [ 28 , 10 ]. For MATH, AIME25, and Minerva, we perform transfer evaluation without additional training or validation. 

Validation scheduler. For DeepMath and BBH, the 100 validation samples are divided into five non-overlapping subsets of 20 samples. At each iteration, validation is conducted on one subset. If an agent achieves a perfect score on the current validation subset, the next iteration uses a different subset. This scheduler reduces overfitting to a single saturated validation subset and encourages robust best-skill selection. 15 C Baseline Details 

Vanilla single-agent methods 

• Chain-of-Thought Prompting (CoT) [ 41 ]: It is instructed to solve the problem step by step, decomposing the problem into intermediate reasoning steps before producing the final answer. We use the same prompt as Agent 1 in Appendix A.1. • Step-Back Prompting [ 50 ]: It is encouraged to first abstract away from the specific problem and identify the underlying principle, concept, or problem type before solving. We use the same prompt as Agent 2 in Appendix A.1. 

Advanced single-agent methods 

• Self-Refine [ 30 ]: It first generates an initial solution and then reviews and improves its own reasoning before finalizing the answer. We use the same prompt as Agent 3 in Appendix A.1. • Reflection [ 33 ]: It solves the problem while reflecting on assumptions, uncertainty, and possible failure points. We use the same prompt as Agent 4 in Appendix A.1. • Self-Consistency [ 39 ]: For each problem, we prompt the model with “Let’s think step by step” and generate 4 independent reasoning paths using stochastic decoding. We extract the final answer from each generated path and determine the final prediction by majority voting over the 4 extracted answers. • Tree-of-Thoughts [ 46 ]: We implement a Tree-of-Thoughts baseline using breadth-first search. For each problem, the model expands the current reasoning states by generating 4

candidate thoughts. Each partial solution is then evaluated by the same model, which serves as a value function for estimating the promise of the current reasoning state. We prune the search tree to a beam width of 2 at each depth and repeat this process up to a maximum depth of 3. After the search reaches the maximum depth, the remaining states are completed into final solutions. The final prediction is selected as the answer from the highest-scoring completed solution. 

Multi-agent methods 

• MAD [ 10 ]: We implement a 4-agent, 2-round Multi-Agent Debate baseline. In the first round, each agent independently solves the problem. In the second round, each agent observes the other agents’ first-round responses and produces a revised final answer. We use majority voting over the second-round answers as the final prediction. • MoA [ 38 ] : We implement a 3-layer Mixture-of-Agents baseline. In Layer 1, 4 proposer agents independently solve the problem. In Layer 2, 4 aggregator agents each receive the original problem and all Layer-1 outputs, and synthesize improved solutions. In Layer 3, a single final aggregator receives the original problem and all Layer-2 outputs, and produces the final answer. We use the final aggregator’s output as the final prediction. • DMAD [ 28 ] : We implement a 4-agent, 2-round Diverse Multi-Agent Debate baseline. Each agent is assigned a distinct reasoning method: Chain-of-Thought, Step-Back Prompting, Self-Refine, or Reflection. In the first round, each agent independently solves the problem using its assigned method. In the second round, each agent observes the other agents’ first-round solutions and produces a refined answer while maintaining its assigned method. We use majority voting over the second-round answers as the final prediction. 

## D Additional Analysis 

D.1 Effect of the self-reflective direction di.

Figure 3 compares the validation trajectories of the full AgentPSO update (With di) and a PSO-style variant (Without di). While both variants benefit from PSO-style guidance, AgentPSO with 

di achieves better performance than the variant without di throughout optimization. In contrast, removing di leads to weaker progress, suggesting that personal-best and global-best guidance alone are not sufficient to fully drive skill evolution. These results indicate that the self-reflective direction 16 Figure 3: Validation accuracy of the global-best and average accuracy over iterations. The global-best trajectory improves steadily, while the variant without it shows only limited progress. Table 10: Inference latency comparison. Latency is measured on 30 DeepMath test examples. Relative latency is normalized by the single-agent baseline.                          

> Method Training Calls/case Avg. Inference time/case (s) Median(s) Relative latency
> Single Agent No 15.40 3.51 1.00 ×
> MAD No 842.72 32.15 7.92 ×
> MoA No 952.45 40.38 9.72 ×
> AgentPSO Yes 422.95 16.30 4.25 ×

di helps each agent learn from its own mistakes and from peer agents’ reasoning, leading to better skill updates over iterations. 

D.2 Inference latency 

Table 10 compares inference latency on 30 DeepMath test examples. The average inference time per case denotes the mean time across the 30 examples required to solve one problem. The median inference time reports the median time, which is less affected by unusually slow cases. Relative latency is normalized by the single-agent baseline, where 1.00 × corresponds to the latency of a single-agent inference. The difference in latency mainly comes from the number of LLM calls required at test time. The single-agent baseline uses one LLM call per case, while MAD and MoA require eight and nine calls per case, respectively. In contrast, AgentPSO requires only four calls per case at test time because the optimized agents solve the problem independently and their answers are aggregated by majority voting. Although AgentPSO requires a separate training stage, it avoids costly test-time debate or layer-wise aggregation. As a result, AgentPSO has an average inference time of 22.95 seconds per case, substantially lower than MAD and MoA, which require 42.72 and 52.45 seconds per case. This shows that AgentPSO can retain the benefits of multi-agent reasoning while reducing test-time computational overhead. 

D.3 Additional medical benchmark 

To further examine whether AgentPSO can be applied beyond mathematical and general reasoning tasks, we conduct additional experiments on medical question-answering benchmarks. We use MedXpertQA [ 55 ] and MedBullets [ 7], which contain challenging medical exam-style questions requiring domain-specific reasoning. AgentPSO is optimized on MedXpertQA using the same four-agent setting as in the main experiments, with 100 training examples and 200 test examples. We then evaluate the optimized agents on both MedXpertQA and MedBullets. Table 11 summarizes the results. On MedXpertQA and MedBullets, AgentPSO improves pass@ k

over MAD, indicating that the optimized agent population is more likely to contain at least one correct solution among its agents. However, its majority-voting accuracy is lower than MAD. Unlike mathematical or general reasoning benchmarks, medical QA is often constrained more by the model’s 17 Table 11: AgentPSO on medical question-answering benchmarks. AgentPSO is optimized on MedXpertQA and evaluated on MedXpertQA and MedBullets. Results show strong pass@ k

performance, indicating improved coverage of correct solutions among agents.                              

> Method MedXpert MedBullets Accuracy Pass@ kAccuracy Pass@ k
> Chain-of-Thought 20.50 -82.50 -Step-Back Prompting 20.00 -82.50 -Self-Refine 22.00 -84.00 -Reflection 20.50 -84.00 -MAD 43.50 47.50 86.00 87.50 AgentPSO 36.00 52.50 84.50 89.00

domain-specific knowledge reliability than by reasoning diversity alone. Since AgentPSO updates reasoning skills rather than updating underlying medical knowledge, the evolved agents may explore more diverse solutions while still failing to form a reliable majority when the required clinical knowledge is not reliably represented. Thus, these results show that AgentPSO can improve answer coverage, as reflected by higher pass@ k, but skill-only optimization is less effective for improving majority-vote accuracy in knowledge-intensive domains. 

## E Example of Results 

E.1 Example of Velocity 

This section provides a qualitative example of how the velocity evolves during AgentPSO optimization. We use Agent 3 as a representative example, which is initialized with the Self-Refine skill. Figure 4 shows the velocity descriptions produced at different training iterations. Unlike the skill itself, the velocity represents the update direction that guides how the agent should revise its current reasoning behavior at each step. Each instruction in the velocity is annotated according to its main source of influence: [di] indicates content introduced by the feedback-guided self-reflective direction, 

[GB] indicates influence from the global-best skill, [PB] indicates influence from the agent’s personal-best skill, [si] indicates influence from the agent’s current skill, and [prev_v] indicates content carried over from the previous velocity. When the personal-best and current skills are identical, we use [PGB] because their contributions cannot be separated. These annotations illustrate how AgentPSO constructs each update direction by combining self-reflection feedback, guidance from the global-best and personal-best skill, the agent’s own skill state, and accumulated momentum from previous velocities. Overall, this example shows that the velocity in AgentPSO is not a simple copy of either the global-best or personal-best skill. Instead, it functions as a compositional update signal that synthesizes multiple information sources into a coherent revision direction. This behavior highlights the role of velocity as the mechanism that translates feedback and peer influence into gradual but meaningful agent evolution. 

E.2 Example of Skill Evolution 

This section provides a qualitative example of how an agent skill evolves during AgentPSO optimiza-tion. We again use Agent 3 as an example, which is initialized with the Self-Refine skill. Figure 5 shows the detailed skill descriptions saved at different iterations. Each instruction is annotated according to its main source of influence: [PB] indicates instructions inherited from the previous personal-best skill, [GB] indicates instructions influenced by the global-best skill, and [di]

indicates instructions introduced by the feedback-guided self-reflective direction. These annotations help show how AgentPSO combines personal-best preservation, global-best guidance, and reflective feedback when updating an agent skill. 18 Table 12: Qualitative trajectory of agent skill. Across iterations, the skill evolves from generic self-refinement and output-format control toward structured problem-type classification, edge-case verification, proof-to-answer calibration, and strict benchmark-format compliance.     

> Iteration Newly Emphasized Behavior
> Iter. 1 Self-review, final-format validation, removal of extraneous output, and direct final-answer generation. Iter. 3 Early problem-type classification, method selection, and explicit handling of symbolic, algebraic, geometric, and boundary-sensitive cases. Iter. 9 Internal self-refinement, proof-to-answer calibration, domain/existence/uniqueness checks, and stricter benchmark-format compliance.

Table 12 provides a compact summary of the same trajectory. Across iterations, the skill evolves from a generic self-refinement instruction into a more structured reasoning policy. In the early stage, the agent mainly learns to align its response with the required answer format, such as checking the expected output type and removing extraneous content. In the middle stage, it begins to incorporate task-level reasoning strategies, including problem-type classification and method selection. By the later stage, the skill further emphasizes domain and edge-case verification, proof-to-answer calibration, and strict benchmark-format compliance. Overall, this example shows that AgentPSO does not simply replace an agent’s initial prompt, but progressively refines it by integrating useful behaviors from multiple update sources. 

## F Prompts in AgentPSO 

Figures 6–9 summarize the prompts used in AgentPSO. The pipeline first prompts each agent to solve the problem using its current skill, then uses the agents’ outputs to derive a self-reflective update direction. This direction is combined with the previous velocity, personal-best skill, and global-best skill to generate a PSO-guided natural-language velocity. The generated velocity is then applied to the current skill to produce the next skill while preserving the agent’s identity. 19 Velocity at Iteration 1 

[PGB] [ di] Revise the workflow to solve first, then run a stricter final validation pass. [PGB] [ di] Keep the current review habit, but make the last check more deliberate about benchmark alignment and answer exactness. [di] Confirm whether the task expects an expression, equation, or plain value. [di] Use the canonical symbol/notation. [di] Remove any stray wording, braces, JSON, or metadata before responding. 

[di] Preserve the strong mathematical reasoning. [di] When the answer is simple, prefer a direct, problem-specific argument over a looser derivation. [di] In symbolic or boundarysensitive problems, especially algebra/cardinality and geometry, explicitly verify the final form and edge cases. [di] [GB] Ensure that the response matches the required format exactly. 

Velocity at Iteration 3 

[PGB] [prev_v] [ di] Revise as Self-Refine with a stricter final validation pass. [PGB] Solve first, then re-check the answer. [di] [PGB] [prev_v] Check the answer against the exact required output type and benchmark notation. [PGB] Keep the self-correcting review habit. [PGB] [ di] Verify whether the response must be a plain value, expression, or equation. [di] [PGB] [prev_v] Strip all commentary, JSON, braces, metadata, and unsupported equalities unless explicitly requested. [di] For choice or parameter problems, return only the required symbol or scalar. [PGB] [prev_v] For symbolic, algebraic, geometric, or boundary-sensitive tasks, preserve careful reasoning internally but output only the canonical final form. [PGB] [prev_v] [ di] Check edge cases, existence/domain conditions, and notation consistency. [PGB] Start by classifying the problem type and choosing the most fitting method. [di] [PGB] [prev_v] Perform a brief final check for correctness, minimality, and exact token match before responding. 

Velocity at Iteration 9 

[si] [GB] Revise as Self-Refine with a stronger step-back start. [GB] [ si] [prev_v] First classify the task, identify the governing principle, and determine the exact required output form before solving. [GB] [si] Use the standard method for the problem class. [si] [GB] [prev_v] Keep all reasoning internal. 

[si] [PB] Solve directly, then run a strict self-check. [si] [PB] [prev_v] Verify correctness, edge cases, domain/existence/uniqueness, and boundary conditions when relevant. [di] Tighten proof-to-answer calibration. [di] Pay special attention to abstract algebra/field-theory and quotient/classification problems. 

[di] Verify claims against the exact prompt and avoid overgeneralizing from partial structure. [GB] [ si][PB] [prev_v] Strengthen final-form control so the response matches the benchmark’s expected shape exactly. [PB] [GB] [prev_v] Distinguish whether the final answer should be a value, equation, or canonical expression. [PB] [ si] [GB] [prev_v] Use minimal notation, with no extra commentary, proof, metadata, or unsupported equalities. [di] Add a final consistency pass for sign, counting, and maximal/subquotient-style arguments. [di] [ si] [prev_v] Ensure symbolic or yes/no prompts return only the requested form. 

Figure 4: Example of velocity across AgentPSO training iterations. The velocity is evolved from “”. [PB] denotes influence from Agent’s personal-best skill, [GB] denotes influence from the global-best skill, [di] denotes the self-reflective direction at the corresponding iteration, [si]

denotes influence from Agent’s current skill, and [prev_v] denotes accumulated influence from the previous velocity. When the personal-best and current skills are identical, we use [PGB] because their contributions cannot be separated. 20 Skill at Iteration 1 

• [PB] Solve the problem first, then review and refine the solution. • [PB] Keep the reasoning strong and self-correcting. • [GB] [ di] In the final pass, validate strict alignment with the task’s required output format. • [di] Check whether the answer should be an expression, equation, or plain value, and use the canonical notation/symbols. • [di] Remove any stray wording, braces, JSON, metadata, or other extraneous content before responding. • [PB] When the solution is simple, give a direct, problem-specific answer rather than an unnecessarily long derivation. • [di] For symbolic, boundary-sensitive, or geometry/algebra problems, explicitly verify edge cases and the final form. • [GB] [ di] Return only the final answer in the exact form the task expects. 

Skill at Iteration 3 

• [PB] Solve the problem first, then self-review and refine the result. • [PB] Preserve a disciplined, self-correcting approach aligned with the task. • [GB] Classify the problem type early and choose the most appropriate method. • [PB] [ di] In the final pass, verify the exact required output type: plain value, expression, or equation. • [GB] [ di] Use canonical notation and the benchmark’s expected symbols; ensure domain, existence, and edge-case conditions are satisfied. • [PB] For simple tasks, answer directly without extra derivation. • [di] For symbolic, algebraic, geometric, or boundary-sensitive tasks, check edge cases and confirm the final form is correct. • [PB] [ di] Remove commentary, metadata, braces, JSON, and unsupported equalities unless explicitly requested. • [di] For choice or parameter problems, return only the required symbol or scalar. • [PB] [GB] Output only the final answer in the exact form requested. 

Skill at Iteration 9 

• [PB] Self-Refine: solve internally, then self-check and refine before responding. • [GB] First classify the task, identify the governing principle, and determine the exact required output form. • [GB] Use the standard method for the problem class and reason carefully, but keep all reasoning internal. • [PB] [ di] Solve directly, then verify domain, existence, uniqueness, edge cases, boundary conditions, and any relevant sign/counting/maximality issues. • [di] Tighten proof-to-answer calibration: make sure the result matches the exact prompt and do not over-generalize from partial structure, especially in abstract algebra, field theory, and quotient/classification problems. • [PB] Perform a strict final validation for correctness, completeness, and format compliance. • [GB] Prefer canonical notation and the simplest correct final expression. • [GB] Match the benchmark’s expected shape exactly—value, equation, or canonical form—with minimal notation. • [GB] Output only the final answer, with no extra commentary, scaffolding, proof, metadata, or unsup-ported equalities. • [di] For yes/no or symbolic prompts, return only the requested form. 

Figure 5: Example of skill evolution across AgentPSO training iterations. The skill is evolved from “ First solve the problem, then review and improve the solution. ”. [PB] denotes instructions inherited from the previous personal-best skill, [GB] denotes instructions influenced by the global-best skill, and [di] denotes instructions introduced by the feedback-guided reflective direction. 21 Problem Solving Prompt 

You are a mathematics competition agent. Base rules: - Solve the provided MATH problem. - The answer may be a number, expression, tuple, interval, or simplified LaTeX expression. - Do not invent missing problem details. - Follow the current skill file below. Current skill file: {skill_text} Solve this problem using only your current skill. Problem: {question} Return exactly one JSON object: {“agent_id”: {agent_id}, “reasoning”: “...”, “answer”: “...” }

Figure 6: Problem-solving prompt used by each agent. Given the current skill file, each agent independently solves the input problem and returns its reasoning trace and final answer in JSON format. 

Generate Self-reflective Direction Eq. (1) 

Current agent skill: {current_skill} Agent’s own reasoning traces and answers: {own_outputs_json} Other agents’ reasoning traces and answers, including correctness: {peer_outputs_json} Instruction: Analyze the agent’s performance compared with peers. Identify general reasoning improvements. Do not overfit to a single problem. Do not rewrite the skill yet. Return only the update direction. 

Figure 7: Self-reflective direction generation prompt. This prompt generates an update direction by comparing the current agent’s performance with peer agents, aiming to identify general reasoning improvements. 22 PSO-Guided Velocity Eq. (2) 

Agent identity to preserve: {agent_identity} Previous velocity v_i: {previous_velocity} Self-reflective direction d_i: {direction} Current skill s_i: {current_skill} Personal best skill p_i: {personal_best_skill} Global best skill g: {global_best_skill} Instruction: Combine the previous velocity, self-reflective direction, lessons from the personal best, and lessons from the global best. Focus on generalizable improvements. Do not copy the personal best or global best directly. Preserve the agent’s identity. Return a concise natural-language velocity of at most {max_velocity_words} words. 

Figure 8: Prompt for generating the PSO-guided velocity vt+1  

> i

. Given the previous velocity, the self-reflective direction, the personal-best skill, and the global-best skill, the model generates a concise natural-language velocity that captures generalizable improvements while preserving the agent’s identity. 

Skill Update from Velocity Eq. (3) 

Agent identity to preserve: {agent_identity} Current skill s_i: {current_skill} Velocity v_i: {velocity} Instruction: Rewrite the skill according to the velocity. Keep the skill concise and general. Preserve the agent’s original role. Remove redundant, overly specific, or contradictory instructions. Use at most 10 bullet points and at most {max_skill_words} words. Do not copy another skill verbatim. Return only the updated skill. 

Figure 9: Prompt for applying the velocity to the skill. Given the current skill and the PSO-guided velocity, the model rewrites the skill into an updated form that preserves the agent’s identity while incorporating concise and generalizable improvements. 23