Title: A Theory of Online Learning with Autoregressive Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06819v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:07:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# A Theory of Online Learning with Autoregressive Chain-of-Thought Reasoning 

Ilan Doron-Arad 1, Idan Mehalel 2, and Elchanan Mossel 11MIT 

> 2

The Hebrew University May 11, 2026 

Abstract 

Autoregressive generation lies at the heart of the mechanism of large language models. It can be viewed as the repeated application of a next-token generator: starting from an input string (prompt), the generator is applied for M steps, and the last generated token is taken as the final output. [JVB +25] proposed a PAC model for studying the learnability of the input-output maps arising from this process. We develop an online analogue of this framework, focusing on the mistake bound of learning the final output induced by an unknown next-token generator. We distinguish between two forms of feedback. In the End-to-End model, after each round the learner observes only the final token produced after M autoregressive steps. In the Chain-of-Thought model, the learner is additionally shown the entire M -step trajectory. Our goal is to understand how the optimal mistake bound depends on the generation horizon 

M , and to what extent observing intermediate tokens can reduce this dependence. Our main results show that the online theory of autoregressive learning exhibits a qualitative picture analogous to the statistical one found by [HMM26], but with a different scale of dependence on the generation horizon. In the End-to-End model, we prove a taxonomy of possible mistake-bound growth rates in the generation horizon M : subject to mild regularity conditions, every rate between constant and logarithmic can arise. We also show that this logarithmic ceiling is unavoidable for the online setting, in the sense that every class of finite Littlestone dimension exhibits at most logarithmic dependence on M . In the Chain-of-Thought model, we show that access to the full generated trajectory eliminates the dependence on M altogether, mirroring the picture proved in the statistical setting. We also analyze autoregressive linear threshold classes. For autoregressive linear thresholds in Rd, we prove that the optimal mistake bound is Θ( d2) under both End-to-End and Chain-of-Thought feedback, and for any generation length M . The methods developed for this analysis also yield new lower bounds in the statistical setting. Along the way, our results resolve several questions left open by [JVB +25]. In particular, we show that even for classes of finite Littlestone dimension, the End-to-End statistical sample complexity can depend on the generation length M .

1

> arXiv:2605.06819v1 [cs.LG] 7 May 2026

# Contents 

1 Introduction 3

1.1 The autoregressive online learning model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2 Results 4

2.1 Background on the Littlestone dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.2 Learning with chain-of-thought supervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.3 End-to-End learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.4 Results for autoregressive linear classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82.5 Non-Littlestone classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.6 A stochastic autoregressive lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

3 Proof sketches of the main results 9

3.1 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.1: mistake bound for learning with CoT . . . . . . . . 93.2 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.3: mistake bound for learning without CoT . . . . . . 10 3.3 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.4: taxonomy for sub-logarithmic rates . . . . . . . . . 10 3.4 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.5: logarithmic lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.5 Proof sketches of Theorem 2.7 and Theorem 2.8: bounds for linear classifiers . . 12 

4 Future work 14 5 Additional related work 15 6 Technical preliminaries 15 

6.1 Littlestone trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 6.2 Class dimensions, learnability, and an SSP lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

7 Upper bound for end-to-end learning 18 8 The taxonomy of end-to-end learning 19 

8.1 Proof of Theorem 8.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.2 Proof of Theorem 8.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

9 Agnostic taxonomy 29 10 Learning with chain-of-thought supervision 30 11 Autoregressive Linear classifiers 31 

11.1 Mistake and sample complexity bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 11.2 Bounds for Efficient learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

12 Non-Littlestone base classes 35 13 Stochastic Autoregressive Lower Bound 38 

21 Introduction 

Modern large language models are not learned once from a fixed collection of independent examples and then used in isolation. They are trained on data accumulated over time, updated through successive rounds of optimization, deployed in interactive environments, and increasingly adapted to the particular users and contexts in which they operate. In such settings, the classical picture of learning from an i.i.d sample captures only part of the story. The learner observes a stream of prompts, receives feedback, changes its behavior, and is then evaluated on future interactions. This is precisely the kind of situation for which online learning was designed. At the same time, the objects being learned are fundamentally autoregressive. A language model does not usually produce an answer in a single atomic step. Rather, starting from a prompt, it generates one token at a time; each newly generated token becomes part of the context for the next prediction. After many such steps, the final token, sentence, or answer is interpreted as the model’s output. Thus, even when the desired task is an end-to-end prediction problem, the mechanism producing the prediction is an iterated next-token process. This creates a natural distinction between two forms of supervision. In one regime, the learner observes only the final answer produced after the autoregressive process has run for M

steps. This corresponds to end-to-end supervision : the intermediate reasoning, if any, is hidden. In a stronger regime, the learner also observes the entire generated trajectory. This corresponds to chain-of-thought supervision : the learner sees not only what answer was produced, but also the sequence of intermediate tokens through which the generator arrived there. Intuitively, such intermediate information should be useful, as it exposes more of the underlying next-token generation mechanism. A recent line of work initiated by [JVB +25] introduced a formal framework for studying this phenomenon in the PAC setting. In their model, the primitive object is a next-token generator 

f : Σ ⋆ → Σ, where Σ is the alphabet of possible tokens. Iterating f for M steps from an input string produces an M -token autoregressive trajectory, whose last token is the end-to-end output. This framework makes it possible to ask, in precise learning-theoretic terms, how the difficulty of learning the induced input-output map depends on the generation length M , and how much chain-of-thought supervision can reduce this dependence. These two fundamental questions were studied in the PAC-learning framework of [JVB +25] by [HMM26]. The present paper develops the online analogue of this theory. Rather than receiving an i.i.d training sample, the learner interacts with an adversarially chosen sequence of examples. On each round, the learner is given a prompt, predicts the final token generated after M autoregressive steps, and then receives feedback. In the end-to-end model, the feedback consists only of the final token. In the chain-of-thought model, the feedback consists of the full M -step trajectory. The central quantity in this setting is no longer sample complexity, but the optimal mistake bound: how many prediction errors are unavoidable before the learner has identified enough of the hidden generator to perform well on all subsequent rounds? There is also a second, more structural reason to study the online model. Online learnability is often a stronger and more robust notion than ordinary distributional learnability. A class that can be learned in the online mistake-bound model is not merely learnable from an i.i.d. sample; it often remains learnable under additional constraints that make standard PAC learning more demanding. A prominent example is private PAC learning, which is equivalent to online learning, in the sense that a class is private PAC learnable if and only if it is online learnable [ABL +22]. Thus, online learnability serves as a powerful certificate of learnability: it indicates that the class has enough combinatorial structure to be learned even in settings where the data are sequential, adversarial, or subject to privacy constraints. We now turn to the formal definition of the model in study. 31.1 The autoregressive online learning model 

We start by recalling the general autoregressive learning framework presented in [JVB +25] and defined below. A next-token-generator is a function 

f : Σ ⋆ → Σ,

where Σ is some finite alphabet. In this paper, we focus on the binary case, so Σ = {0, 1} unless stated otherwise. The function f naturally induces an autoregressive generation process. Define the apply-and-append map ¯f : Σ ⋆ → Σ⋆ of f by ¯f (x) := x ◦ f (x).

Denote ¯f M = ¯f ◦ · · · ◦ ¯f

| {z } 

> Mtimes

.

We define the M -step chain of thought of f on x to be the length M suffix of ¯f M (x), denoted by f CoT −M (x). The corresponding end-to-end output of the M -step chain of thought of f on x

is the last symbol of f CoT −M (x), denoted as f e2e −M (x) := f CoT −M (x)[ −1]. So, each class F of next-token-generators (also called a base class ) naturally induces two classes of interest: 

FCoT −M := {f CoT −M : f ∈ F} , Fe2e −M := {f e2e −M : f ∈ F} .

In this paper, we are interested in learning the class Fe2e −M online in two regimes: e2e -learning, also called end-to-end learning, and CoT -learning, also called end-to-end learning with chain-of-thought supervision. Let us start with the e2e -learning regime. We consider a game played between a learner Lrn and an adversary Adv played for T many rounds. Before the game begins, Adv chooses a target function f⋆ ∈ F . In each round t ∈ [T ], Adv first sends an instance 

xt ∈ Σ⋆ to Lrn , and then Lrn chooses a symbol (or a label , in classification theory terminology) ˆyt ∈ Σ. Finally, Adv reveals the correct end-to-end output f e2e −M⋆ (xt), and Lrn suffers loss 1 if and only if ˆyt̸ = f e2e −M⋆ (xt). Most of our results hold already for a deterministic learner, so unless stated otherwise, we limit our study to the case that Lrn is deterministic. We now define the CoT -learning regime. CoT -learning is very similar to e2e -learning; the only difference is that in CoT -learning, Adv reveals the entire chain-of-thought f CoT −M⋆ (xt), instead of only f e2e −M⋆ (xt). In both regimes, Lrn ’s goal is to minimize its total cumulative loss throughout the game, also called the mistake bound . Adv ’s goal is to maximize this quantity. Note that e2e -learning amounts to standard online learning of the class Fe2e −M . In contrast, in CoT -learning Lrn 

receives f CoT −M⋆ (xt) as feedback from Adv , but tested only on correctness of the final symbol of 

f CoT −M⋆ (xt), that is, on f e2e −M⋆ (xt). The main goal in this paper is to understand how the mistake bound of autoregressive learning scales with the generation length M , and to what extent chain-of-thought supervision may help reducing the mistake bound. Throughout the paper, we assume that M ≥ 2, as the case M = 1 is equivalent to the standard online learning scenario. 

# 2 Results 

This section assumes some familiarity with basic terms in learning theory, such as PAC-learning. The unfamiliar reader may read Section 6, where we present all relevant technical background in a self-contained manner. 42.1 Background on the Littlestone dimension 

We first give some relevant background on the Littlestone dimension, which is necessary to understand the results. The main combinatorial quantity that arises when analyzing mistake bounds of online learning a hypothesis class H ⊂ Y X of functions from a domain X to a label space Y is the Littlestone dimension [Lit88,DSBDSS15] of H, denoted as L(H). Let us informally define the Littlestone dimension. A formal definition is given in Section 6.2. L(H) is the maximal depth of a perfect Littlestone tree that is shattered by H. A perfect Littlestone tree for H is a rooted perfect binary tree whose internal vertices are labeled by instances from X , and for each internal vertex, its two outgoing edges are labeled by two different labels from Y. Such a tree is shattered by H if every branch b (root-to-leaf path) in the tree has a function hb ∈ H that agrees with b. Here, “agrees” means that for all x ∈ X that labels an internal vertex in b, if the outgoing edge of the internal vertex labeled by x that lies in b is labeled with y ∈ Y , then 

fb(x) = y. A fundamental result of [Lit88, DSBDSS15] states that the optimal mistake bound of learning H is precisely L(H). Since e2e -learning of F with generation length M amounts to standard online learning of the class Fe2e −M , our analysis focuses on bounding L(Fe2e −M ). On the other hand, CoT -learning is not a standard online learning task: while the loss is measured with respect to the target function f e2e −M⋆ ∈ F e2e −M , the feedback is given by the target function f CoT −M⋆ ∈ F CoT −M . A useful approach towards proving upper bounds for CoT -learning exploited in [JVB +25, HMM26] is to replace CoT -learning in the more difficult task of learning the class FCoT −M . This task is indeed harder, since in contrast with CoT -learning, any disagreement between the learner’s full chain-of-thought prediction ˆy ∈ ΣM counts as a mistake, even if the final End-to-End output is correct. We use the same approach and derive mistake bounds for CoT -learning by bounding 

L(FCoT −M ). Unless stated otherwise, we limit our discussion only for base classes with finite Littlestone dimension. This limitation is analogous to the limitation of finite VC-dimension in the statistical setting [JVB +25, HMM26]. Further justification for this limitation is given in Section 12, where we show that for non-Littlestone classes, learnability of Fe2e −M can alternate between the two extremes of impossible even with CoT -supervision, and trivial even without 

CoT -supervision. A similar result was proved in [HMM26] for the statistical setting, for non-VC classes. 

2.2 Learning with chain-of-thought supervision 

The results in this section are proved in Section 10 Our first main result shows that having 

L(F) < ∞ and chain-of-thought supervision eliminates any dependence on the generation length 

M .

Theorem 2.1. For every base class F ⊂ ΣΣ⋆

(even if |Σ| > 2, and even for |Σ| = ∞), and for every generation length M , we have 

L(FCoT −M ) ≤ L(F).

Notably, Theorem 2.1 holds even when |Σ| > 2. [HMM26] proved an analog result for the statistical setting: having VC (F) < ∞ (where VC (F) denoted the VC-dimension of F) and chain-of-thought supervision eliminates any dependence of the PAC-sample complexity on the generation length M .It is not hard to think of autoregressively-degenerate classes (classes of functions that keeps generating the same bit forever) for which L(FCoT −M ) ≥ L(F) for all M , and so the bound of Theorem 2.1 cannot be improved in general, not even by a constant factor. 5Theorem 2.1 can be used to improve, for some classes, the PAC CoT -learning sample complexity bound given by [HMM26]. Their result shows that the PAC sample complexity of 

CoT -learning is proportional to VC (F) · VC ⋆(F), where VC ⋆(F) = VC (F⋆), where F⋆ is the dual class of F, which is the class obtained by “switching roles” between X and F. However, VC ⋆(F)can grow as 2 VC( F). Using a standard online-to-batch conversion, we deduce the following sample complexity bound. Notably, it holds even when |Σ| > 2. 

Theorem 2.2. For every base class F ⊂ ΣΣ⋆

(even if |Σ| > 2, and even for |Σ| = ∞), and for all M , if L(F) < ∞ the class FCoT −M is PAC-learnable with sample complexity 

m(ε, δ ) = O

 L(F) + log(1 /δ )

ε



.

So, the advantage of Theorem 2.2 over the result of [HMM26] is that it holds for non-binary base classes F, and also that it provides a better bound for every binary class F for which 

L(F) < VC( F) VC ⋆(F), such as d-hamming balls. Along the way, Theorem 2.2 also settles a log M gap from [JVB +25], who proved essentially the same bound as of Theorem 2.2, but with L(F) log M replacing the L(F) in our bound. They asked if the logarithmic dependence on M is necessary, and our bound shows that it is not. 

2.3 End-to-End learning 

We first establish a general upper bound that bounds how L(Fe2e −M ) can scale with M in the worst case. 

Theorem 2.3. For every base class F, and for every generation length M , we have 

L(Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log( L(F)M )) .

Theorem 2.3 is proved in Section 7. While it gives a strong guarantee for any base class F

(of finite Littlestone dimension), unlike the guarantee of Theorem 2.1, it is not clear how tight Theorem 2.3 is. Indeed, it is not hard to think of classes F for which L(Fe2e −M ) ≤ L(F) for all 

M , and it is not immediately clear if there are classes for which L(Fe2e −M ) scales as L(F) log M ,or even as some sub-logarithmic monotone function of M . This naturally raises the following question: What are the possible growth rates of L(Fe2e −M ) in terms of L(F) and M ?This question was considered by [HMM26] in the statistical setting. They proved that under mild regularity conditions, essentially any at-most-linear growth rate of VC (Fe2e −M ) with M

is realized by some class F. We prove the analogous result for the online setting, with similar mild regularity conditions to those of [HMM26]. Let us explicitly state those conditions. Fix a sufficiently large universal constant M0. We say that a function r : N+ → N+ is a well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate if: 1. r is sub-logarithmic: r(M ) ≤ 14 log( M ) for all M ≥ M0.2. r is non-decreasing : M1 ≥ M2 =⇒ r(M1) ≥ r(M2) for all M1, M 2 ≥ 1. 3. r is sub-additive: r(M1 + M2) ≤ r(M1) + r(M2) for all M1, M 2 ≥ 1. Note that all natural sub-logarithmic growth rates such as √log M , ⌈log log M ⌉ etc. satisfy our definition. We now state the result for well-behaved sub-logarithmic rates. 6Theorem 2.4. For any well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate r there exists a base class F

such that: 1. L(F) = 1 .2. L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( r(M )) for all M ≥ M0.

The definition of F and the lower bound strategy of the second item is due to unpublished private communication [HM26]. Theorem 2.4 handles only sub-logarithmic rates. For logarithmic rates, we prove the following 

Theorem 2.5. For any d ∈ N+, there exists a class F such that L(F) = O(d) and 

VC( Fe2e −M ) = Ω( L(F) log M )

for all sufficiently large M .

Theorem 2.4 and Theorem 2.5 are proved in Section 8. Since VC (F) ≤ L(F) for all F,together with the upper bound of Theorem 7.1, this establishes that for any d ∈ N+ there exists a class F such that L(F) = O(d) and VC( Fe2e −M ), L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( L(F) log M )for all sufficiently large M .So, Theorem 2.4, Theorem 2.5 and Theorem 2.3 establish an essentially complete taxonomy of the possible growth rates of L(Fe2e −M ) in terms of L(F) and M .Along the way, Theorem 2.5 resolves an open question on the statistical setting posed by [JVB +25]: they proved that for any class F it holds that VC (Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log M ), and asked if the logarithmic dependence in their bound can be improved. Theorem 2.5 shows that their bound is tight. 

2.3.1 Corollary for agnostic learning 

Much of the online learning literature studies agnostic online learning , where there is no target function in the class that perfectly explains the streamed data. In this setting, instead of measuring the mistake bound, we are usually interested in the regret bound , which is the optimal mistake bound measured after subtracting the number of mistakes made by the best function in class. A known result of [ABED +21] allow to derive a similar taxonomy for agnostic end-to-end learning. 

Corollary 2.6. Let F be a base class. Then for all sufficiently large M , there exists an agnostic online learner for Fe2e −M with regret bound 

O

p T L(F) log M



.

Furthermore, for any well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate r there exists a base class F

such that L(F) = 1 and the optimal regret bound for agnostic online learning Fe2e −M is 

Θ

p T · r(M )



for all M ≥ M0 and sufficiently large T .Finally, for any d ∈ N+, there exists a class F such that the optimal regret for agnostic online learning of Fe2e −M is 

Θ

p T d log M



for all M ≥ M0 and sufficiently large T .

Corollary 2.6 is proved in Section 9. 72.4 Results for autoregressive linear classifiers 

An interesting specific study case is the basic class of autoregressive linear classifiers . This class was presented in [JVB +25] and further studied in [HMM26, JMS +26]. It is naturally defined as follows. Let d ∈ N be the dimension. For any w ∈ Rd and b ∈ R define the function 

fw,b : {0, 1}⋆ → { 0, 1} by 

fw,b (x) = 1 



> min {d, |x|}

X

> i=1

w[−i]x[−i] + b ≥ 0



for all x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆. That is, fw,b acts as the linear classifier defined by ( w, b ) when taking only values on the d-boolean cube, and the input point to the classifier is given by the (at most) final 

d bits of the input x. The class Fd, lin of autoregressive linear classifiers in dimension d is defined as 

Fd, lin := {fw,b : w ∈ Rd, b ∈ R}.

2.4.1 Mistake and sample complexity bounds 

The results in this section are proved in Section 11.1. [JVB +25] proved that VC (Fe2e ,M d, lin ) = O(d2)for all M . This implies that the dependence of the sample complexity of CoT -learning Fd, lin on 

d is also at most O(d2). [HMM26] improved the dependence on d for CoT -learning from O(d2)to O(d). No lower bounds (that hold for any M > 1) were previously given. In this work, we prove that the optimal mistake bound for online learning Fe2e 

> d, lin

, both with and without CoT supervision, is Θ( d2). 

Theorem 2.7. For any dimension d and generation length M we have 

L(Fe2e −Md, lin ) = O(d2).

Furthermore, for any M and any d ≥ 3, there exists an adversary forcing Ω( d2) many mistakes on any learner for Fe2e −Md, lin , even with CoT -supervision. 

The technique we use for the lower bound of Theorem 2.7 allows us to derive the first lower bound for the statistical setting that holds for M > 1. 

Theorem 2.8. For any dimension d ≥ 3 and generation length M ≥ 2, any PAC-learner for 

Fe2e −Md, lin has sample complexity Ω( d), even with CoT -supervision. 

Theorem 2.8 shows that the upper bound of [HMM26] for PAC-learning Fe2e  

> d, lin

with CoT -supervision is tight. 

2.4.2 Computational complexity 

The results in this section are proved in Section 11.2. The preceding bounds are information-theoretic. We also obtain a computational separation between e2e and CoT -learning for linear classifiers. 

Theorem 2.9. Assume Hardness of Learning TC 0.1 Then there is no possibly improper online learner for Fe2e −Md, lin that runs in time polynomial in d, M and the input length per round and makes polynomially many mistakes. In contrast, with CoT -supervision, there is a deterministic polynomial-time learner for Fe2e −Md, lin with mistake bound O(d2 log d).

Thus, CoT -supervision removes the computational obstruction, at least up to a logarithmic factor in the mistake bound. 

> 1This assumption is formally given in Assumption 11.5; for more details, the reader is referred to, e.g., [JVB +25].

82.5 Non-Littlestone classes 

The finite Littlestone assumption is essential. For L(F) < ∞, our upper bound gives a uniform logarithmic ceiling in M . Without this assumption, a single base class can alternate between trivial and unlearnable horizons. 

Theorem 2.10. There exists a binary base class F and horizons Mi = i + 4 such that 

i odd =⇒ L(Fe2e −Mi ) = 0 , i even =⇒ L(Fe2e −Mi ) = ∞.

In particular, the odd horizons are trivial already in the e2e model, while the even horizons are unlearnable even with CoT -supervision. 

Thus, outside the Littlestone regime, there is no stable growth law in M . Theorem 2.10 is proved in Section 12 

2.6 A stochastic autoregressive lower bound 

We also show that the deterministic picture of CoT online learning does not extend to stochastic autoregressive generators. In this model, a generator maps each string in Σ ∗ to a distribution over the next token, so even after the input xt and target generator are fixed, the observed CoT 

trajectory is random. For the stochastic setting, the natural benchmark is regret. 

Theorem 2.11. For every odd M ≥ 1, there exists a stochastic two-function base class G =

{g−, g +} whose direct next-token problem has regret O(1) , but for every online learner, there exists g⋆ ∈ G such that learning Ge2e −M against target g⋆ incurs expected regret Ω(2 M ) for horizon 

T = Θ(4 M ).

Thus, stochastic autoregression can exponentially amplify the difficulty of an otherwise trivial next-token learning problem. This is in stark contrast to the upper bound for deterministic CoT 

online learning given in Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.3. Theorem 2.11 is proved in Section 13. 

# 3 Proof sketches of the main results 

In this section, we explain the main technical ideas of the proofs of our main theorems. 

3.1 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.1: mistake bound for learning with CoT 

Theorem 2.1 proves that with CoT -supervision, learning Fe2e −M is possible with mistake bound at most L(F), for all M . The proof follows from a relatively simple SOA-style 2 argument we describe below. We design an online learner Lrn for the class FCoT −M , which operates as follows. 

Lrn maintains a version space Vt of all generators f ∈ F that are consistent with the feedback given up to the end of round t: at first V0 = F, and at the end of any round t, Lrn sets Vt to be all functions in Vt−1 that are consistent with the feedback of round t. In each round t, Lrn 

receives xt and predicts max  

> ˆy∈{ 0,1}M

L(Vt−1|xt→ˆy),

where Vt−1|xt→ˆy denotes the restriction of Vt−1 only to functions for which autoregressive chain-of-thought on xt is precisely ˆy. The crucial observation is that there is at most one ˆy ∈ { 0, 1}M

such that 

L(Vt−1|xt→ˆy) = L(Vt−1).   

> 2The SOA stands for standard optimal algorithm , which is the original algorithm given in [Lit88] for online learning of binary classes.

9Indeed, if there are two distinct ˆ y, ˆy′ such that 

L(Vt−1|xt→ˆy) = L(Vt−1|xt→ ˆy′ ) = L(Vt−1)then one can construct a Littlestone tree of depth L(Vt−1) + 1 which is shattered by Vt−1, which is a contradiction to the fact that L(Vt−1) is the optimal mistake bound for learning Vt−1, as proved by [DSBDSS15]. Therefore, after every mistake of Lrn the Littlestone dimension of the version space decreases by at least 1, which implies an upper bound of L(V0) = L(F). 

3.2 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.3: mistake bound for learning without CoT 

Consider a Littlestone tree T of depth m that is shattered by Fe2e −M . It suffices to show that 

m = O(L(F) log (L(F)M )). The idea is a variant of tree-covering arguments occasionally used in online learning (see [FHMM23] for example). First, we inflate T to represent the entire chain-of-thought for every instance labeling a node in the tree. We do so by replacing each node and its two outgoing edges by the the full M -step generation tree matching the instance labeling the node. An M -step generation tree for x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆, denoted by TM (x), is a Littlestone tree of depth M with the root labeled by x, and for any prefix u ∈ { 0, 1}<M , the node at the end of the prefix u is labeled by x ◦ u. So the branches of TM (x) represent the different possible chain-of-thoughts for x. Let TF be the inflated tree, which is now of depth mM . We now analyze the size of the set of branches in TF that are realized by some f ∈ F , denoted as 

BF (TF ). Since every generation tree in TF is originated from a node in T and its two outgoing edges, and since T is shatterd by Fe2e −M , it is not hard to see that BF (TF ) grows by a factor of at least 2 after each M levels of TF , which implies 

|BF (TF )| ≥ 2m.

On the other hand, a known (for example, by [Bha21]) Sauer-Shelah-Perles lemma for trees give 

|BF (TF )| ≤ 

 mM 

≤ L(F)



.

By the two inequalities, we obtain 2m ≤

 mM 

≤ L(F)



.

Solving the inequality for m gives the stated bound. 

3.3 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.4: taxonomy for sub-logarithmic rates 

To prove Theorem 2.4, we construct a class F (suggested in private communication [HM26]) that has two desired properties: 1. It is simple, and in fact has L(F) = 1. 2. We can make Fe2e −M as complicated as we want up to some well-behaved sub-logarithmic rate r(M ). In fact, given any well-behaved sub-logarithmic rate r, we have L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( r(M )). 10 To implement this, we define a fixed baseline function f , and F is constructed from a class of functions such that each function differs from f on precisely one instance. This fact alone suffices to prove the first item. To prove the second item, the baseline function f , as well as the other functions in the class, should be carefully chosen to fit the given well-behaved sub-logarithmic rate r. The proof, and even the definition of F, are quite technical. Below, we explain the high level idea of the definition and proof. The function f is defined such that it is “interesting” only on instances of the form 

xs,k,z := 0 s10 k10 s−k−1z

where s can be any natural number, k ∈ 2r(s), and z ∈ { 0, 1}<r (s). Leaving some technical details aside, f (xs,k,z ) = k|z|, so f (xs,k,z ) in fact returns a bit of the binary representation of k,in a location encoded by the length of z. For any other instance x, define f (x) = 0. Note that assuming that r is sub-logarithmic is crucial already here: since k can be large as 2 r(s), assuming that r is sub-logarithmic ensures that s − k − 1 ≥ 1, and so 0 s−k−1, which appears in ss,k,z , is a well-defined binary string. Now, for every s, k as above we define a function fs,k . This function is defined exactly as f everywhere except for the instance 0 s10 k, for which f returns 0, but we define fs,k (0 s10 k) = 1. The class F is defined as the class of all fs,k . The definition of fs,k is one of the core ideas of the proof: when the instance 0 s10 k is given to fs,k and only to fs,k , the s-step autoregressive generation of fs,k for 0 s10 k is non-degenerate, and in fact encodes the binary representation of k ∈ 2r(s). This is the high-level idea of the lower bound: for s := M , any learner makes at least roughly log 2r(M ) = r(M ) many mistakes before identifying the “correct” 

k, where the logarithmic lower bound comes from optimality of the halving algorithm in this case. For the upper bound, the main idea is to design a learner for which the halving algorithm used to find the correct k is essentially the only obstacle. Let us describe this learner in high level. Until making its first mistake, the learner always predicts as f e2e −M . Once the learner makes its first mistake on some instance x, it knows the following fact: 

f e2e −Ms⋆,k ⋆ (x)̸ = f e2e −M (x),

where fs⋆,k ⋆ is the target function. Since fs⋆,k ⋆ differs from f only on the instance 0 s⋆

10 k⋆

, this implies that x must be of the form 0 s⋆

10 i for some i ∈ N. Therefore, the learner now knows s⋆

just by looking on x, and so the learner now only needs to find k⋆ to know the target function 

fs⋆,k ⋆ . If s⋆ = O(M ), then k⋆ can only receive as few as 2r(s⋆) ≤ 2r(O(M )) ≤ 2O(r(M )) (1) many values, and thus the halving algorithm finds k⋆ after at most O(r(M )) many mistakes, which is analogous to the argument of the lower bound. Note that (1) does not hold for a general rate r. The first inequality holds since r is non-decreasing, and the second inequality holds since 

r is sub-additive. This is the exact reason that we make those two assumptions. However, it is also possible that s⋆ ≫ M . In this case, we need to use a completely different argument. In the case that s⋆ ≫ M , the learner acts as follows. For any x not of the form 0 s⋆

10 i it predicts as f

and never errs. For x which is of the form 0 s⋆

10 i, the learner always predicts 0 until making its first mistake on such an instance, which implies that 

f e2e −Ms⋆,k ⋆ (0 s⋆

10 i) = 1 , (2) where 0 s⋆

10 i is the instance the learner errs on. However, recalling the definition of f , it is non-degenerate only for instances of the form 0 s10 k10 s−k−1z, which in particular means that in our case s⋆ − k − 1 zeroes must be appended before getting to the interesting part. However, 11 since s⋆ ≫ M , we have that s⋆ − k − 1 > M , and thus M is simply not large enough to even get to the interesting part. So, in fact, the case (2) can essentially never happen (leaving aside some technical details). 

3.4 Proof sketch of Theorem 2.5: logarithmic lower bound 

Theorem 2.5 states that for any (large enough) d there exists a base class F with L(F) = O(d), and such that VC (Fe2e −M ) = Ω( d log M ) for all (large enough) M . The idea is to construct for every d, M a base class F := F(d, M ) of size ≈ M d which is very unbalanced for every instance 

x (that is, the functions of F demonstrate an overwhelming majority towards one of the possible labels for every x), but after M generation steps they become much more balanced for many instances. This is precisely what makes L(F) = O(d), while VC (Fe2e −M ) = Ω( d log M ). In more detail, our specific choice of overwhelming majority is of a ≈ (1 − 1/M )-fraction of functions for all x. This indeed gives L(F) = O(d), since we start from ≈ M d many functions, and for each restriction of the form Fx→r := {f ∈ F : f (x) = r} for some r ∈ { 0, 1}, the number of surviving functions decreases by a factor of M . Therefore, after at most roughly d such restrictions (that correspond to an optimal learner’s mistakes), there are no surviving functions left. On the other hand, we ensure that after M many generation steps, there is a constant fraction of functions realizing each label for x, for many instances x. Since for every restriction of an instance to be classified with some label after M generation steps a constant fraction of the class stays consistent, it is implied that VC( Fe2e −M ) = Ω(log( M d)) = Ω( d log M ).

It remains to construct a class having the above desired overwhelming majority property for all x. However, ensuring this desired property simultaneously for all x seems difficult to do deterministically. We thus define the class at random: every f gives to every x (in a specific desired set of instances) r ∈ { 0, 1} with probability 1 − 1/M , and 1 − r with probability 1 /M .Figure 1 demonstrates why Fe2e −Mx→0 and Fe2e −Mx→1 both contain a constant fraction of F.In this intuitive explanation, one of the important facts we overlooked is that F := F(d, M ), that is, it depends on the generation length M , while we want the result to hold for all M . This is resolved by “gluing” together {F (d, M )}M for all M values, a technique used for example in [CM24]. 

3.5 Proof sketches of Theorem 2.7 and Theorem 2.8: bounds for linear classifiers 

The interesting part of our bounds for autoregressive linear classifiers is the following “latch” mechanism allowing to “drag” the output of the base classifier throughout the entire autoregressive process in the price of reducing the dimension by 2: 

Lemma 3.1 (Latch lemma) . Fix d ≥ 3 and denote m := d − 2. Then, for all v ∈ Rm and c ∈ R,there exists fw,b ∈ F d, lin such that 

f e2e −M 

> w,b

(z10) = fv,c (z)

for all z ∈ { 0, 1}m and all M ≥ 2.

Once we have Lemma 3.1, the rest of the arguments in the proofs of Theorem 2.7 and Theorem 2.8 are either simple or known. Indeed, the upper bounds for autoregressive linear classifiers are not larger than the standard upper bounds for (standard) linear classifiers. 12 0

> 041
> 031
> 021
> 01

Figure 1: The generation tree TM (x(j)), visualized for the hard class Fd,M with M = 4 and 

j = 1 (that is, x(j) = 0). Note that there are M − 1 red nodes, where the version space of each typically contains an O(1) /M fraction of the class, and thus in total a ( M − 1) O(1)  

> M

= O(1) fraction of the class is contained in the union of red vertices. The edges where the size of the class drops by a factor of O(1) /M are blue. In the rest of the edges, the size of the version space only drops by a factor of at least 1 − O(1) /M . Therefore, a fraction of (1 − O(1) /M )M = O(1) of the class is typically contained in the green vertex version space. Furthermore, for all f in the version space of the red nodes, we have f e2e −M (0) = 0, and for all f in the version space of the green node, we have f e2e −M (0) = 1. So, for each possible choice of labeling for 0, we get to keep a constant factor of the version space. Applying this idea repeatedly allows to shatter a set of size Ω(log( M d)) = Ω( d log M ). 13 Therefore, it essentially suffices to show that the autoregressive process cannot make the class simpler, and the class maintains its original mistake bound/sample complexity. The idea of the proof of Lemma 3.1 is quite simple. We define w to be as v, except for the final two locations of w, that we are free to choose. We also choose b to be as c, but shifted in some value. When choosing the above values carefully, we are able to ensure that: 1. For all z ∈ { 0, 1}m: fw,b (z10) = fv,c (z) (first bit of CoT is correct). 2. For any x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ that ends with 00, we have fw,b (x) = 0 (always drag 0). 3. For any x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ that ends with 1, we have fw,b (x) = 1 (always drag 1). The above three items essentially establish the statement of the lemma. The idea is to use known lower bounds for dimension m, but add the suffix 10 to every instance used in the proof, so the dimension becomes d := m + 2. Now, the first item ensures that for every z ∈ { 0, 1}m,

fw,b (z10) outputs the correct intended output fv,c (z). The other two items then establish that this correct output is being dragged throughout the entire autoregressive generation process: if 

fw,b (z10) = 0 then the generated new instance must end at 00, and if fw,b (z10) = 1 it must end with 1. Thus, any lower bound strategy for Fm, lin works also for Fe2e −Md, lin for all M , even with 

CoT -supervision. 

# 4 Future work 

Our work leaves some natural and interesting directions for future work. Below, we describe some of them. 

Extend the results to the multiclass setting. Some of our results extend to the multiclass setting |Σ| > 2 “for free”, such as the upper bound for CoT -learning (Theorem 2.1). This is not true, however, for all results in this paper. For example, our initial attempts to extend the upper bound for e2e -learning (Theorem 2.2) to the multiclass setting demonstrated an extra log |Σ|

factor, which we do not know if necessary, even for some classes. Perhaps an even more interesting direction in the multiclass setting is to study the optimal mistake bounds with and without CoT -supervision attainable with different models of partial feedback, such as bandit feedback and feedback graphs. 

The stochastic setting. As we showed in Theorem 2.11, the closer to practice setting with stochastic CoT is controlled by the Littlestone dimension of the base class. Further characterizing the online and PAC learnability of the stochastic setting is a natural direction for a follow up work. 

Studying specific classes. A natural direction is to move beyond worst-case base classes and analyze standard finite-Littlestone classes directly, as we did by studying autoregressive linear threshold functions. Other concrete examples for future work include Boolean classes such as conjunctions, disjunctions, decision lists, and bounded-depth decision trees, as well as finite-domain geometric classes such as intervals and unions of intervals. For such structured classes, one may hope for sharper mistake bounds than the general O(L(F) log (L(F)M )) guarantee, or for class-specific separations between e2e -learning and CoT -learning. 14 5 Additional related work 

Beyond the closest autoregressive PAC works discussed above, we mention three surrounding directions studied extensively in recent years. 

Chain-of-thought data in language-model training. Chain-of-thought and scratchpad-style supervision were introduced empirically as ways to expose intermediate computations in language models [NAG +21, WWS +22]. This is related to supervised fine-tuning and next-token prediction more broadly [BMR +20, WBZ +22], following the standard transformer language-modeling paradigm [VSP +17, RWC +19]. Recent RL-based post-training methods also encourage longer reasoning traces [JKL +24, DGY +25], but their supervision signal is typically attached to final outcomes rather than to every intermediate token. The cost and importance of curating chain-of-thought data is also emphasized in large-scale model reports [DJP +24]. Our results formalize this distinction in an online model: observing only the final generated token can increase the mistake bound with the generation length M , while full CoT feedback removes this dependence for finite-Littlestone base classes. 

Theory of chain-of-thought. A growing theoretical literature studies why intermediate rea-soning traces can help. This includes universality of autoregressive next-token predictors [Mal23], sample-complexity bounds in terms of CoT information [AML25], and reinforcement learning after next-token prediction [TMUK25]. Other works study the power and limitations of trans-former architectures with chain-of-thought reasoning [MS23, LLZM24, CPW25, KS24, HWS +25]. These works are mostly statistical, architectural, or optimization-theoretic. In contrast, our results are architecture-free and online: they characterize the possible mistake-bound growth rates of autoregressive learning under end-to-end feedback and show when trajectory feedback eliminates this growth. 

Computational hardness. Our computational separation is related in spirit to the broader literature on hardness of distribution-free learning; see [Ser25] for a recent survey. Relevant examples include hardness results for intersections of halfspaces [KS09, Tie24], and DNFs or related classes under average-case or pseudorandomness assumptions [ABW10, DSS16, DV21, ABCM25]. Unlike this hardness literature, most of our paper is information-theoretic; the computational result shows that, even for autoregressive linear classifiers, end-to-end feedback can leave a computational obstruction that CoT feedback removes. 

# 6 Technical preliminaries 

The online autoregressive model studied in this work was formally defined in Section 1.1. The goal of this section is to formally define additional relevant concepts from learning theory, as well as to state known and relevant classic results. Most of the definitions and notation are borrowed from [HMM26]. 

6.1 Littlestone trees 

In this paper, a Littlestone tree (or just a tree) T is a finite, full, and rooted binary tree, accompanied with the following information: 1. Every internal node v is associated with an instance x ∈ X , denoted as xv.15 0

# 00 

# 000 001 

# 01 

# 010 011 

Figure 2: The tree TM (x) for M = 2 , x = 0. 2. For every internal node v, the left outgoing edge is labeled with 0, and the right outgoing edge with 1. The set of vertices and edges of T are denoted by v(T) and e(T), respectively. Every path in the tree that starts at the root is called a prefix. A prefix that ends at a leaf is called a branch .The set of all branches in T is denoted B(T). A prefix can be identified by a sequence of vertices starting from the root, or by just the last vertex in the prefix, or by the associated sequence of edges. A prefix p = v0, . . . , v t in T defines a sample ( x1, y 1), . . . , (xt, y t) ∈ X × Y in the natural way: xi = x(vi−1), and yi is the label of the edge ( vi−1, v i) for all i. We denote x(p) = x1, . . . , x t

and y(p) = y1, . . . y t. For a given vertex v, we use pT(v) (or p(v), when the tree T is fixed) to denote the path from the root to v. We may overload notation and use p(v) to denote the sample associated with the path, when the context is clear. If there is a bijection between the set of vertices and the set of their instance labelings, we may replace v with its instance label in all notation. 

Generation trees. Given a base class F, a generation length M , and an instance x, there is a natural way to represent all possible labels that could be given to x by functions in FCoT −M

as a decision tree T(x) := TM (x). We call this tree the generation tree of x of depth M , or simply the generation tree of x, if T is fixed. The tree is constructed as follows. The root of 

T(x) is x. The left child of x is labeled by x0 and likewise, the right child of x is labeled by 

x1. We continue this labeling process inductively on the children of x, for a total number of T

many times. There is a bijection between the set {y(b)} for all branches b in T(x) and the label space {0, 1}T . Furthermore, note that a function f CoT −T ∈ F CoT −T realizes a branch b if and only if f CoT −T (x) = y(b). The branch b may be referred to as the computation path of f CoT −T

on x. This representation will be useful in some of the analyses conducted in this work. See a visualized example of a generation tree in Figure 2. 

6.2 Class dimensions, learnability, and an SSP lemma 

Consider a tree T and a class F ⊂ { 0, 1}X . Given a function f ∈ F , we say that f realizes 

a prefix p = v0, . . . , v t in T if f (x(p)i) = y(p)i for all i. The set of all functions f ∈ F who realizes p are called the version space of vt (or of p, or of ( x(p), y(p))) with respect to F, which is denoted as VF (vt), or simply V (vt) when F is fixed. We say that F shatters T, if for every leaf ℓ ∈ T it holds that V (ℓ)̸ = ∅. The set of trees shattered by F is denoted by T (F). The set of branches in T that are realized by F are denoted by BF (T). That is, if F shatters T then 

BF (T) = T. We now define two fundamental and useful dimensions. 16 Definition 6.1 (Littlestone dimension) . The Littlestone dimension of F, denoted L(F), is the maximal depth of a perfect Littlestone tree which is shattered by F. If there is no such maximal depth, we say that L(F) = ∞.The Littlestone dimension is known to characterize online learnability .

Definition 6.2 (Online learnability) . In the online learning model, in each round t an adversary sends xt ∈ X to the learner. The learner then predicts 3 ˆyt ∈ Y , and the adversary then sends the correct label yt ∈ Y . Finally, the learner suffers the 0/1 loss 1[ ˆyt̸ = yt]. The adversary is restricted to be realizable : there must be f ∈ F so that all examples ( xt, y t) satisfy yt = f (xt). A learner’s mistake bound is the maximal number of mistakes it makes in this setting, against any adversary. We say that F is online learnable with mistake bound L if there exists a learner with mistake bound L such that L < ∞.We will use the following known characterization. 

Theorem 6.3 (Online learnability characterization [Lit88]) . The optimal mistake bound for online learning F is precisely L(F). That is, there exists a learner with mistake bound L(F), and there exists an adversary who can force at least L(F) many mistakes on any learner. 

For Littlestone classes, there is a useful SSP (Sauer-Shelah-Perles) lemma for trees, proved e.g. by [Bha21]. 

Theorem 6.4 (SSP for trees [Bha21]) . Let F ⊂ { 0, 1}X be a class, and let T be a Littlestone tree of depth n with vertices labeled by instances from X . Then 

|BF (T)| ≤ 

 n

≤ L(F)



≤ n2L(F).

The work of [DSBDSS15] further extended the definition of the Littlestone dimension to non-binary classes F ⊂ Y X , |Y| ≥ 2. In their definition, instead of labeling each left edge with 0 and each right edge with 1, one may choose for every two sibling edges (two edges that are the outgoing edges of a single vertex) two distinct labels from Y to be labeled by. When Y = {0, 1},this definition is reduced to the standard definition. However, for |Y| > 2, [DSBDSS15] showed that this definition still characterizes the optimal mistake bound for online learning F.

Theorem 6.5 (Multiclass Online learnability characterization [DSBDSS15]) . The optimal mistake bound for online learning F ⊂ Y X for any Y is precisely L(F).

Some of our results have implications for autoregressive PAC-learning, so for completeness we also formally define PAC-learnability here. 

Definition 6.6 (PAC learnability) . We say that F ⊂ Y X (where Y is not necessarily binary) is PAC-learnable with sample complexity m := m(ϵ, δ ), if there exists a PAC-learner Lrn :(X × Y )⋆ → Y X , such that for every distribution D over X , for every ϵ, δ > 0, and for every target function f⋆ ∈ F , if x := x1, . . . , x m ∼iid D and ( x, y) := (( xi, f ⋆(xi)) mi=1 , then 

LD,f ⋆ (fLrn (x,y)) > ε 

with probability at most δ, where fLrn (x,y) := Lrn (x, y) and LD,f ⋆ (f ) := Pr x∼D[f (x)̸ = f⋆(x)]. 

> 3We only discuss deterministic learners.

17 Our results have implications for e2e -PAC learning, which is simply PAC-learning of Fe2e −M ,and also for CoT -PAC learning, which is the same as e2e -PAC learning, with the difference that training examples reveal the entire chain-of-thought led to the final output. So, as in the online setting, every PAC sample complexity bound for learning FCoT −M is also A PAC sample complexity bound for CoT -learning, which is an easier task than the task of PAC-learning 

FCoT −M .We now define the VC-dimension, which is known to characterize the sample complexity of PAC-learning binary classes ( |Y| = 2), up to accuracy ( ϵ, δ ) factors [BEHW89, EHKV89, Han16]. The VC-dimension is defined as the Littlestone dimension, but restricted only to trees where each branch is labeled by the same sequence of instances. A formal definition is given below. 

Definition 6.7 (VC-dimension) . The VC dimension of F, denoted VC (F), is the maximal depth of a perfect tree which is shattered by F, and also satisfies x(b1) = x(b2) for every two branches b1, b 2. If there is no such maximal depth, we say that VC( F) = ∞.Since in the context of the VC-dimension we require that x(b1) = x(b2) for every two branches b1, b 2, instead of discussing trees, we may simply refer to x(b1) as a shattered set . Note that the definition of the VC-dimension immediately implies that VC (F) ≤ L(F) for any class 

F.As the result below states, analyzing the Littlestone dimension of a class F could have an advantage in the case where |Y| > 2. 

Theorem 6.8 (Online-to-PAC conversion [Lit89]) . If L(F) < ∞, then F is learnable with sample complexity 

m(ε, δ ) = O

 L(F) + log(1 /δ )

ε



.

In the case |Y| = 2, Theorem 6.8 does not give any advantage, since [Han16] proved the same bound with L(F) replaced by VC (F), and VC (F) ≤ L(F). However, Theorem 6.8 applies also to the case |Y| > 2, while bounds depending on the VC-dimension are not, since the VC-dimension is defined only over binary classes. 

# 7 Upper bound for end-to-end learning 

Theorem 7.1. Let F be a base class. Then for all M ≥ 2:

L(Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log( M L(F))) .

Proof. Let T be a Littlestone tree of depth m which is shattered by Fe2e −M . We will show that m = O(L(F) log (M L(F))), which implies the lemma. For every node u ∈ { 0, 1}<m of T

(where the node is given by the labels of the edge-path from the root to the node), let xu be the instance labeling that node. Now, we inflate the tree T to a tree TF of depth mM that takes into account the intermediate autoregressive steps. The idea is to inflate every two sibling edges in T to possible paths of length M using a generation tree. Let us formally describe the recursive construction of TF . We maintain a saved path v ∈ { 0, 1}<m in the original tree T

saved in every node of TF . In the root of TF , the saved path is ∅ (the empty path), and every node inherits the saved path from its parent, until we explicitly update the saved path. For the base of the recursion, we construct the generation tree TM (x∅). For the recursive step, we either finish construction, or paste another generation tree at every leaf of the tree constructed so far. Concretely, for every leaf of the tree constructed so far, if v is the saved path of this leaf and 

|v| = m, finish construction. Otherwise, if it is a left leaf (that is, a leaf that lies at the tip of an 18 edge labeled with 0), paste TM (xv0) at this leaf, and update the saved path to v0. Otherwise, paste TM (xv1) at this leaf, and update the saved path to v1. For a class F and a tree T, let BF (T) be the set of branches of T that are realized by F.Now, note that 

|BF (TF )| ≥ 2m. (3) Indeed, there is a one-to-one function G from the branches of T to the branches of BF (TF ). For a branch u ∈ { 0, 1}m of T, let fu ∈ F such that f e2e −Mu realizes u. Then by construction of TF , fu ∈ F agrees with some branch in TF that its leaf has the saved path u. So, G(u)returns this branch. Therefore G(u) ∈ BF (TF ) and G is clearly a bijection. On the other hand, Theorem 6.4 implies 

|BF (TF )| ≤ (mM )2L(F). (4) From (3) and (4), we obtain: 2m ≤ (mM )2L(F).

Solving this inequality for m implies the stated bound. 

# 8 The taxonomy of end-to-end learning 

We have shown that for any base class F and any generation length M ≥ L(F) we have 

L(Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log M ). Below, we prove that essentially any “well-behaved” sub-logarithmic growth rate of L(Fe2e −M ) between constant and logarithmic in M is realized by some Littlestone class. We further show that for all d, there exists a class F with L(F) = O(d) and 

L(Fe2e −M ) ≥ VC( Fe2e −M ) = Ω( L(F) log M ) (5) for all M . This essentially completes the taxonomy of online e2e -learning of Littlestone classes. Along the way, the right-hand side of 5 resolves an open question of [JVB +25], who proved that VC (Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log M ) for all F, M , and asked if this upper bound is tight for some classes. Before we formally state the results, we define precisely what we mean by a “well-behaved” sub-logarithmic growth rate. Fix a sufficiently large universal constant M0, to be used throughout the section. We say that a function r : N+ → N+ is a well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate if: 1. r is sub-logarithmic: r(M ) ≤ 14 log( M ) for all M ≥ M0.2. r is non-decreasing : M1 ≥ M2 =⇒ r(M1) ≥ r(M2) for all M1, M 2 ≥ 1. 3. r is sub-additive: r(M1 + M2) ≤ r(M1) + r(M2) for all M1, M 2 ≥ 1. Note that all natural sub-logarithmic growth rates such as √log M , ⌈log log M ⌉ etc. satisfy our definition. We can now state the result for well-behaved sub-logarithmic rates. 

Theorem 8.1. For any well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate r there exists a base class F

such that: 1. L(F) = 1 .2. L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( r(M )) for all M ≥ M0.

The definition of F and the lower bound strategy of the second item is due to unpublished private communication [HM26]. For logarithmic (in contrast to sub-logarithmic) rates, we prove the following 19 Theorem 8.2. For any d ∈ N+, there exists a class F such that L(F) = O(d) and 

VC( Fe2e −M ) = Ω( L(F) log M )

for all M ≥ M0.

Together with the upper bound of Theorem 7.1, this establishes that for any d ∈ N+ there exists a class F such that L(F) = O(d) and VC( Fe2e −M ), L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( L(F) log M )for all M ≥ max {M0, L(F)}.In the following sections, we prove Theorem 8.1 and Theorem 8.2. 

8.1 Proof of Theorem 8.1 

Fix the growth rate r.We first define the class F. For every s ≥ M0 let 

Ks := {r(s), r (s) + 1 , . . . , r (s) + 2 r(s) − 1}.

That is, Ks is simply the set {0, . . . , 2r(s) − 1} of size 2 r(s), with r(s) added to each element. We now define a “baseline” function f : {0, 1}⋆ → { 0, 1} as follows. For every s ≥ M0, k ∈ Ks,

j ∈ { 0, . . . , r (s) − 1} and z ∈ { 0, 1}j , set: 

f (0 s10 k10 s−k−1z) = ( k − r(s)) j+1 

where ( k − r(s)) j+1 is the ( j + 1) st bit in the binary representation of k − r(s). For any other string x that does not fit the form above, we set f (x) = 0. Note that 0 s−k−1 is well-defined, since 

k + 1 ≤ r(s) + 2 r(s) ≤ 14 log s + 2 14 log s ≤ √s ≤ s − 1, (6) where the final inequality holds since s ≥ M0. Thus s − k − 1 ≥ 1. Now, we define for each fixed pair s and k ∈ Ks the following single-point modification of f :

fs,k (x) = 

(

1 x = 0 s10 k,f (x) otherwise .

We may now define the class F as 

F := {fs,k : s ≥ M0, k ∈ Ks}.

We first prove the first item of Lemma 8.1. 

Lemma 8.3. We have L(F) = 1 .Proof. We have L(F) ≥ 1 since F contains more than one function. To see that L(F) ≤ 1, consider the following online learner for F. The learner predicts as f until it makes its first mistake. Once it makes a mistake, it discovers the correct function and always predicts as this function. We now prove the lower bound in the second item of Theorem 8.1. We prove it by showing the stronger claim VC( Fe2e −M ) ≥ r(M ) for all M ≥ M0.20 Lemma 8.4. Fix M ≥ M0. Then the set 

AM := {ai := 0 M 10 i : 1 ≤ i ≤ r(M )}

is shattered by Fe2e −M .Proof. Let y = y1, . . . y r(M ) be a labeling of AM . It suffices to show that this labeling is realized by Fe2e −M . Let b be the number given in binary representation by the vector y. and let 

k := r(M ) + b ∈ KM . We claim that for all i, f e2e −MM,k (ai) = bi. Let’s describe the M -length computation path of f CoT −MM,k on ai:1. In the first k − i ≥ b steps, fM,k agrees with f , which means that 0 is appended. 2. After the first k − i ≤ √M steps (the inequality is by (6) ), the computation path reaches the instance 0 M 10 k, so in step k − i + 1, 1 is appended, by definition of fM,k .3. By definition of f , 0 is appended in the following M − k − 1 steps. 4. So far, we completed a computation of length k − i + 1 + M − k − 1 = M − i, so we have i

more steps. By definition of f , in the last i steps of the computation, the generated bits are y≤i.Overall, we deduce that: 

f CoT −MM,k (ai) = 0 k−i10 M −k−1y1, . . . , y i,

which implies f e2e −MM,k (ai) = yi.Lemma 8.4 immediately implies the lower bound of the first item of Theorem 8.1. We now turn to the upper bound. For every s ≥ M0 define the “bucket” 

Bs := {0s10 i : i ≥ 0}.

Lemma 8.5. Fix M, s ≥ M0 and k ∈ Ks. For all x / ∈ BS :

f e2e −Ms,k (x) = f e2e −M (x).

Proof. Since fs,k and f differ only on the instance xs,k := 0 s10 k, it is possible that f e2e −Ms,k (x)̸ =

f e2e −M (x) only if xs,k is an instance appearing in an intermediate step in the generation of 

f CoT −M (x). This is possible only if x is a prefix of xs,k . So, we only need to analyze the case where x is both a prefix of xs,k and not in the bucket Bs. So the form of x must be x = 0 n for some 1 ≤ n ≤ s. In this case, f appends 0 in every step, so xs,k never appears. We now prove another lemma that handles the case s ≫ M , where Bs is the “correct” bucket. The lemma establishes that in this case, for any function in Fe2e −M there is at most a single instance it labels with 1. 

Lemma 8.6. Fix s ≥ M0, s ≥ 10 M , i ≥ 0 and k ∈ Ks. Then 

f e2e −Ms,k (0 s10 i) = 1 ⇐⇒ M = k − i + 1 .

Proof. For every point of the form in the statement of the lemma, f appends 0, Therefore, it is only possible that fs,k (0 s10 j ) = 1 in the case where fs,k differs from f , that is, in the case j = k.Therefore, if i > k then the instance 0 s10 k is never reached in the autoregressive generation. Thus, we assume that i ≤ k. We consider the three possible sub-cases. 21 1. If M < k − i + 1, then 0 the autoregressive function of fs,k appends 0 for at most k − i

many times, and thus fs,k is never receives 0 s10 k as input, and so f e2e −Ms,k (0 s10 i) = 0. 2. If M = k − i + 1, then f e2e −Ms,k (0 s10 i) = 1, since in the last step the instance 0 s10 i is given as input to fs,k .3. If M > k − i + 1, then the instance 0 s10 k is given as input to fs,k , and then there is at least one more step before the autoregressive generation of CoT is done, since M > k − i + 1. The definition of f implies that the following s − k − 1 bits after 0 s10 k1 are 0, and only then 1 could be appended. However, we have 

s − k − 1 ≥ s − 2 12 log s − 1 ≥ s − √s − 1 ≥ s/ 2 ≥ 5M > M, 

where the first inequality is since k ≤ r(s) + 2 r(s) and the assumption r(s) ≤ 14 log s,and the third inequality holds since s ≥ M0. So, only zeroes are appended, and thus 

f e2e −Ms,k (0 s10 i) = 0. 

Lemma 8.7. For all M ≥ M0:

L(Fe2e −M ) ≤ 20 r(M ).

Proof. We construct an online learner that makes at most 20 r(M ) many mistakes. As long as the learner hasn’t made a single mistake, it predicts as f e2e −M on every instance. So, the number of mistakes made in this phase is at most 1. After the first mistake on an instance x, the learner changes its behavior as follows. Let 

fs⋆,k ⋆ be the (unknown) target concept. So, we know that f e2e −Ms⋆,k ⋆ (x)̸ = f e2e −M (x). Therefore, Lemma 8.5 implies that x ∈ Bs⋆ . Thus x = 0 s⋆

10 i for some i ∈ N, so the learner now knows s⋆

by just looking at x. Thus, from this point, the learner only needs to learn the class 

Fs⋆ := {fs⋆,k ⋆ : k ∈ Ks⋆ }.

We consider the two possible cases. First, suppose that s⋆ ≤ 10 M . In this case, the learner runs the halving algorithm over Fs⋆ .The mistake bound in this case is log |F s⋆ | = log 2 r(s) = r(s) ≤ r(10 M ) ≤ 10 r(M ),

where the first inequality is since r is non-decreasing, and the second inequality is since r is sub-additive. In the complementing case, we have s⋆ > 10 M . As usual, for x / ∈ Bs⋆ , the learner predicts as f , and thus is always correct for x / ∈ Bs⋆ . For x ∈ Bs⋆ , that is, x of the form 0 s⋆

10 i, the learner always predicts 0, until making a mistake. Once it makes a mistake on the instance 0s⋆

10 i for some i ∈ N, it means that f e2e −Ms⋆,k ⋆ (0 s⋆

10 i) = 1. Lemma 8.6 implies that in this case 

k⋆ = M + i − 1. So the learner now knows both s⋆ and k⋆, and therefore knows the target concept fs⋆,k ⋆ and can always predict as fs⋆,k ⋆ .Summing all mistakes, we deduce that overall the learner makes at most 1 + 10 r(M ) many mistakes, which concludes the proof. 

Proof of Theorem 8.1. The theorem is given by combining Lemma 8.3, Lemma 8.4, and Lemma 8.7. 22 8.2 Proof of Theorem 8.2 

We show that for any d ∈ N, there exists a class F with L(F) = O(d), and such that VC (Fe2e −M ) = Ω( d log M ) for all sufficiently large M . Our general upper bound asserts that L(Fe2e −M ) = O(d log M ) for all M ≥ L(F), and thus L(Fe2e −M ) = Θ( d log M ). Our construction solves an open question from [JVB +25]. They showed that for any class F

and all M , it holds that VC (Fe2e −M ) = O(L(F) log M ), and asked if the logarithmic dependence (or, in fact, any dependence) on M is necessary. Our proof gives a positive answer to this question. The proof is via the probabilistic method applied to a “hard” random class defined below. 

8.2.1 The hard class 

Fix d, M ∈ N+. Let 

N := M 10 d, Z := {0i : i ∈ [M 2]}.

be the size of the class, and Z be the set of instances on which the class is “interesting”. Partition 

Z to 

Z1 := {0jM :j∈[M ]}, Z0 := Z\Z1,

so |Z1| = M, |Z0| = M 2 − M . We now draw N functions independently at random. For each 

a ∈ [N ] and x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆, define fa(x) as follows: 

• If x / ∈ Z, let fa(x) = 0. 

• Otherwise, if x ∈ Z1, let fa(x) = 1 w.p. 1 − 1/M , and fa(x) = 0 w.p. 1 /M .

• Otherwise, if x ∈ Z0, let fa(x) = 0 w.p. 1 − 1/M , and fa(x) = 1 w.p. 1 /M .Now, let 

Fd,M := {fa : a ∈ [N ]}.

For each x ∈ Z0, we say that 1 is the minority label of x, and 0 is the majority label of x. We define the analog for Z1.We are now ready to ready to begin with the proof of Theorem 8.2. We begin by proving the upper bound L(Fd,M ) = O(d) with high probability. 

8.2.2 Upper bounding the Littlestone dimension of the base class 

The intuition for this bound is that since |F| = N = M 10 d and for each instance there exists a label r ∈ { 0, 1} for which typically only a 1 /M -fraction of the version agrees with, the version space should be empty at the bottom of some branch of length O(d). However, this is only true on average , while the Littlestone dimension is determined by the maximal depth of a shattered tree, so the proof is in fact more challenging than this intuition. We use the technique of [CM24], who provided such an analysis for a similar random class. 

Lemma 8.8. Let d, M ∈ N larger than some large enough universal constant. With probability at least 3/4, we have 

L(Fd,M ) ≤ 100 d. 

Proof. Denote F := Fd,M . We show that the probability that F shatters a tree of depth 100 d is at most 1 /4. Fix a tree T whose internal nodes are labeled by instances from {0, 1}⋆, and that is shattered by F. If T contains nodes labeled with instances outside of Z it cannot be shattered, so we may assume that all nodes are labeled by instances from Z. So, every node has precisely 23 one minority edge , corresponding to the minority label of the instance labeling it. Let B1/2(T)be the set of branches in T in which precisely 50 d of the edges are minority edges. Note that 

B1/2(T) =

100 d

50 d



≥ 2100 d

2√50 d ≥ 2100 d

20 √d , (7) where the first inequality is by the known bound  2nn

 ≥ 22n 

> 2√n

, applied with n = 50 d. Since T is shattered, in particular every branch of B1/2(T) is realized by at least one function f ∈ F . Fix a branch b ∈ B1/2(T) and f ∈ F . Since the draw of f is independent for each instance Pr[ f realizes b] ≤ 1

M 50 d . (8) Now, note that each function can realize at most a single branch. Therefore, if T is shattered, then there exists an injective mapping ϕ : B1/2(T) → [N ] such that for all b ∈ B1/2(T), fϕ(b)

realizes b. That is ϕ assigns to each b ∈ B1/2(T) the index of the function realizing it, and the same function cannot be assigned to two different branches. Fix a mapping ϕ. Since the probability that fϕ(b) realizes b is independent of the other randomness, and using (8) , the probability that for all b ∈ B1/2(T), fϕ(b) realizes b is at most 

 1

M 50 d

|B1/2(T)|

. (9) Since there are at most N |B1/2(T)| = M 10 d|B1/2(T)|, using (9) and (7) , the probability that there exists ϕ so that for all b ∈ B1/2(T), fϕ(b) realizes b is at most 

M 10 d|B1/2(T)|

 1

M 50 d

|B1/2(T)|

=

 1

M 40 d

|B1/2(T)|

≤

 1

M 40 d

 2100 d

> 20 √d

≤ 1

M 2√d·2100 d . (10) So, we deduce that for a fixed tree T, the probability that it is shattered by F is at most   

> 1
> M2√d·2100 d

. The number of perfect trees of depth 100 d labeled by instances from Z is at most 

|Z|2100 d

= M 2·2100 d

. Thus, using 10, the probability that there exists a tree T of depth 100 d

which is shattered by F is at most 

M 2·2100 d 1

M 2√d·2100 d = M 2·2100 d(1 −√d) < 1/4,

which concludes the proof. We now turn to the lower bound VC (Fe2e −M ) = Ω( d log M ) with high probability. To formalize a choice of a random subset before it is drawn, we use standard propositional logic formalization, as defined below. 

8.2.3 A framework for choosing subsets from a random class 

We define a notion of rules for choosing a subset of a random class F before it is drawn, by restricting the labels of some the instances in the domain. A rule is any restriction on the labels of some of the instances, that can be represented as a propositional logic formula with the conjunction and disjunction connectives, where the examples ( x, y ) ∈ X × Y are the atomic variables, and the assignments are given by the functions of the class. A rule is said to be 

independent of an instance x, if x does not appear in any of the atomic variables used in the rule. For example, if x1, x 2, x 3, x 4 ∈ X , then (( x1, 0) ∧ (x2, 1)) ∨ (x3, 0) is a rule, and it is independent 24 of x4. The truth value of a variable (example) ( x, y ) under the assignment (function) f ∈ { 0, 1}X

is naturally defined as f (x, y ) := 1[ f (x) = y], where f (x, y ) = 1 represents true and f (x, y ) = 0 

false . The truth value of a rule R under the function f , denoted by f (R), is inductively defined in the standard way used in propositional logic. A rule R for the class F naturally defines a subclass of F, denoted as F(R), of all functions satisfying the rule: 

F(R) = {f ∈ F : f (R) = 1 }.

Given a decision tree, any branch b in the tree naturally induces the rule ( x(b), y(b)) (formally, we need to replace the commas in the sequence ( x(b), y(b)) to ∧ connectives, to make it a valid rule, but it is understood that ( x(b), y(b)) represents this rule). Likewise, any two branches 

b1, b 2 naturally induce the rule ( x(b1), y(b1)) ∨ (x(b2), y(b2)), and this can be extended to any number of branches. For a set of branches B, we let R(B) be the rule induced by B.We now use this framework and prove a standard concentration lemma for predetermined rules defined over Fd,M .

8.2.4 A concentration lemma for predetermined rules Lemma 8.9. Let d ∈ N larger than some large enough universal constant, and let M ≥ d2. Let 

R be a family of rules such that |R| ≤ eM 6d

. Then w.p. at least 3/4 over the draw of Fd,M , for all 

x ∈ Zr (where r ∈ { 0, 1}) and all R ∈ R , such that R is independent of x and |F d,M (R)| ≥ M 8d,we have 12M |F d,M (R)| ≤ |F d,M (R ∧ (x, 1 − r)) | ≤ 32M |F d,M (R)|.

Proof. Since R is independent of x, we have 

X := |F d,M (R ∧ (x, 1 − r)) | ∼ Bin( |F d,M (R)|, 1/M ), μ := E[X] = |F d,M (R)|/M ≥ M 8d−1.

Multiplicative Chernoff bound thus gives Pr 



X / ∈

 μ

2 , 3μ

2

 

≤ 2e−μ/ 12 ≤ e−M 8d−1/12 .

Taking a union bound over all x ∈ Z, R ∈ R , the failure probability that there exist a pair ( x, R )not satisfying the lemma is at most 

|Z||R| e−M 8d−1/12 ≤ M 2eM 6d

e−M 8d−1/12 < 1/4,

where the final inequality holds for large enough d.

8.2.5 Lower bounding the VC-dimension of the end-to-end class 

We are now ready to prove the lower bound on VC (Fe2e ,M d,M ). In light of Lemma 8.9, we fix a class F := Fd,T drawn as in Section 8.2.1, for which the lemma holds. 

Lemma 8.10. We have 

VC( Fe2e ,M ) = Ω( d log M ).

Let m := 

j d log M

> 600

k

. For each j ∈ [m], let x(j) := 0 (j−1) M +1 , and denote S := {x(j) : j ∈ [m]}.We will prove that S is shattered by Fe2e ,M .The main tool used to prove Lemma 8.10 is the concentration lemma proved above. To use it, we need to define set R of rules determined before drawing Fd,M . We will need two different types of rules, one to control the version space, and one to control any possible specific autoregressive trajectory. Let us start with the first type. For each j ∈ [m], consider the generation tree of depth M rooted at x(j). In this tree, define 25 • The green branch , given by the sequence g(j) := 0 T −11 of edge labels. 

• The red branches , given by the sequences 

r(j) 

> q

:= 0 q−110 M −q, q ∈ [M − 1] .

See Figure 1 for an illustration of the green and red branches, as well as an intuitive explanation for how they can be used to yield the lower bound on VC( Fe2e ,M d,M ). Now, let 

G(j) := {g(j)}, R(j) := {r(j) 

> q

: q ∈ [M − 1] }

be the sets of green and red branches, respectively. We now define for every possible labeling 

u := ( u1, . . . , u t) ∈ { 0, 1}t of ( x(1) , . . . , x (t)) where t ≤ m, a rule Qu as follows: 

Qu := ^ 

> j∈[t]: uj=1

R(G(j)) ∧ ^ 

> j∈[t]: uj=0

R(R(j)).

That is, Qu requires to satisfy the rule induced by the green branch g(j) for x(j) that are labeled by 1, and to satisfy the rule induced by the red branches R(j) for x(j) that are labeled by 0. This makes sense, as one can note that 

• f |= R(G(j)) = ⇒ f e2e −M (x(j)) = 1. 

• f |= R({r(j) 

> q

}) = ⇒ f e2e −M (x(j)) = 0, for any q ∈ [M − 1]. Now, let 

Rver := {Qu : u ∈ { 0, 1}t, t ∈ [m]}.

We now turn to the second type. For two instances x, y ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ and t ≤ | y|, we define the appropriate rule for the t-prefix path that begins at x and follows the trajectory given by the first t bits of y as 

Pt(x, y ) := 

> t

^

> s=1

(xb 1 . . . b s−1, b s).

In the case where we consider the entire trajectory of y, that is t = |y|, we abbreviate P (x, y ) := 

P|y|(x, y ). So, f |= Pt(x, y ) means that when starting from the instance x, the first t bits autoregressivly generated by f are precisely y1, . . . , y t. Now we can also define a rule that captures functions from a specific version space given by a labeling u ∈ { 0, 1}<m , that also follow a specific trajectory of a green or red branch starting at the next instance x(|u|+1) . Formally, let: 

Rbran := {Qu ∧ Pt(x(|u|+1) ,b ) : u ∈ { 0, 1}<m , t ∈ [T ], b ∈ G(|u|+1) ∪ R(|u|+1) }.

Now, let 

R := Rver ∪ R bran 

To use Lemma 8.9, we need to show that R is not too large. 

Lemma 8.11. We have 

|R| ≤ M 2d

26 Proof. We have 

|R ver | ≤ m2m,

since there are at most m2m options for the choice of u. directly from the definition. Note that for all j ∈ [m], |G(j) ∪ R(j)| ≤ M . Thus 

|R bran | ≤ m2m · M · M

since there are at most m2m options for the choice of u, at most T options for the choice of t,and at most M options for the choice of b. So, over all: 

|R| ≤ |R ver | + |R bran | ≤ m2m(M 2 + 1) ≤ d log M · M d(M 2 + 1) ≤ M 2d,

which concludes the proof. We now show that when committing to a label of another instance, the version space does not decrease by too much. 

Lemma 8.12. Let u ∈ { 0, 1}t where t < m , and suppose that |F (Qu)| ≥ 1 

> e300 |u|

N . Then for any 

r ∈ { 0, 1}:

|F (Qur )| ≥ 1

e300 |F (Qu)|.

Proof. To use Lemma 8.9, we have to show that any rule R we use, it holds that |F (R)| ≥ M 8d.We will use rules of the form 

Qu ∧ Pt(x|u|+1 , b ), (11) which are indeed in Rbran ⊂ R . where t ∈ [M ], and b ∈ G(|u|+1) ∪ R(|u|+1) . By assumption, 

|F (Qu)| ≥ 1

e300 |u| N ≥ 1

M d M 10 d = M 9d,

so the bound of Lemma 8.9 holds for Qu. Now, from monotonicity of the inclusion relation, to prove that for each possible Pt(x|u|+1 , b ) we have F(Qu ∧ Pt(x|u|+1 , b )) > M 8d, it suffices to show that it holds for the worst-case Pt(x|u|+1 , b ). In the worst case, b has a single minority edge and T − 1 majority edges. Thus, using (1 − 100 /M )M ≥ e−200 for large enough M , for any rule of the form of (11) we have 

F(Qu ∧ Pt(x|u|+1 , b )) ≥ 1100 M (1 − 100 /M )M |F (Qu)| ≥ 1100 M e−200 M 9d ≥ M 9d−2,

where the final inequality holds for large enough M . We can now prove the statement of the lemma. Let us start with the case r = 1. Recall that any function f realizing the green branch 

g(|u|+1) satisfies f e2e −M (x(|u|+1) ) = 1. So, it suffices to lower bound the number of such functions. Since the green branch has only majority edges, we obtain: 

|F (Qu1)| ≥ (1 − 100 /M )M |F (Qu)| ≥ e−200 |F (Qu)|.

Likewise, any function f realizing any of the red branches r(|u|+1)  

> q

for some q ∈ [M − 1] satisfies 

f e2e −M (x(|u|+1) ) = 0. So, it suffices to lower bound the number of such functions. Any red branch has a single minority edge, and there are M − 1 red branches. Furthermore, a function can realize at most one branch, so the set of functions realizing different red branches are disjoint. Thus overall: 

|F (Qu0)| ≥ (M − 1) 1100 M (1 − 100 /M )M |F (Qu)| ≥ e−300 |F (Qu)|,

where the final inequality holds for large enough M .27 We are now ready to prove Lemma 8.10. 

Proof of Lemma 8.10. We prove the lemma by showing that |F (Qu)| > 0 for all u, which means that any labeling of S is realized by some function in F. This establishes that VC (Fd,M )e2e ,M ≥

m = Ω( d log M ). The claim follows almost directly from Lemma 8.12 by proving the following stronger claim: 

|F (Qu)| ≥ 1

e300 |u| N (12) for all u ∈ { 0, 1}≤m. Indeed, having (12) we are done: 1

e300 |u| N ≥ 1

e300 d log M

> 600

M 10 d ≥ M 9d.

So, it remains to prove (12) . We prove it by induction on |u|. To handle the base case |u| = 0, let us use the notation F(Q0) = F. That is Q0 means just F with no further restrictions. So indeed: 

|F (Qu)| = |F| = N = 1

e300 ·0 N = 1

e300 ·| u| N, 

so the base case holds. For the induction step, Let u′ = ur where |u′| ≥ 0 and r ∈ { 0, 1}. By induction hypothesis, we may assume that |F (Qu)| ≥ 1 

> e300 |u|

N So: 

|F (Qu′ )| = |F (Qur )| ≥ 1

e300 

1

e300 |u| N = 1

e300 |u′| N

where the inequality is by the induction hypothesis and Lemma 8.12. This concludes the proof. Recall that F := F(d, M ). That is, so far we assumed that the number of autoregressive iterations M is fixed. The only remaining step is to prove that we can construct from F(d, M ) a single class that uniformly handles all M values, without significantly increasing it’s Littlestone dimension. We prove this final step below. 

8.2.6 A gluing lemma 

We prove a gluing lemma that glues together the classes {F d,M }M ∈N+ without increasing the Littlestone dimension by more than 1. Our lemma is similar to the gluing lemma of [CM24]. 

Lemma 8.13. Let c > 0 be a universal constant, and fix d ∈ N larger than some universal constant. Let fd : N → N be a function. Suppose that for all large enough M there exists a class 

Fd,M such that: 1. L(Fd,M ) ≤ c · d.2. VC( Fe2e −Md,M ) ≥ fd(M )

3. Let 

XM := {x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ : ∃f ∈ F d,M , f (x) = 1 }.

Then |XM | ≤ M 3.Then, there exists a class ˆF such that L( ˆF) ≤ c · d + 1 and for all large enough M it holds that 

VC( Fe2e −M ) ≥ fd(M ).

28 Proof. For every M ≥ 1 and for every f ∈ F d,M , define the shifted function ˆf of f as ˆf (x′) = 

(

f (x) ∃x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ : x′ = 0 2M 4

x, 

0 otherwise, for all x′ ∈ { 0, 1}⋆. Now, let ˆFd,M := { ˆf : f ∈ F d,M }.

Denote the analog of XM for ˆFd,M as ˆXM := {x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ : ∃ ˆf ∈ ˆFd,M , ˆf (x) = 1 }.

We show that M1 > M 2 =⇒ ˆXM1 ∩ ˆXM2 = ∅. Indeed, the length of every instance in ˆXM2 is at most 2 M 42 + M 32 . However, the length of every instance in ˆXM1 is at least 2M 41 ≥ 2(M2+1) 4

≥ 2M 42 2M 32 > 2M 42 + M 32 ,

and so indeed ˆXM1 ∩ ˆXM2 = ∅. Now, define ˆF := [

> M

ˆFd,M .

where the union is taken over all large enough M . First, since ˆF contains ˆFd,M for all large enough M , it is clear that for all large enough M :VC( ˆFe2e −M ) ≥ VC( ˆFe2e −Md,M ) ≥ fd(M ),

as desired. It remains to prove that L( ˆF) ≤ c · d + 1. To see why this is true, consider an online learner for ˆF that always predicts 0, until it makes it first mistake. Once it makes a mistake, it can infer that the target function gives 1 to the instance it erred for. Since ˆXM1 ∩ ˆXM2 = ∅

for any two distinct M1, M 2, this reveals the identity of the class ˆFd,M from which the target function is taken. Now, the learner learns ˆFd,M , on which it will make at most c · d many mistakes by assumption. This concludes the proof. We may now prove the main theorem. 

Proof of Theorem 8.2. The theorem follows from combining Lemma 8.10 and Lemma 8.13. 

# 9 Agnostic taxonomy 

Consider the following known result. 

Theorem 9.1 ([BDPSS09, ABED +21]) . Let F be a binary function class. 4 Then the optimal regret bound for agnostic online learning of F is 

Θ

p L(F)T



.

Using these bounds and our taxonomy of possible Littlestone dimension of Fe2e −M , we may infer an essentially complete taxonomy for agnostic learning as well. First, we deduce a general upper bound.        

> 4The upper bound of [ABED +21] requires that Fsatisfies some mild measurability constraints, which hold for all classes relevant to the scope of this paper, since our domain X={0,1}⋆is countable.

29 Corollary 9.2. Let F be a base class. Then for all sufficiently large M , there exists an agnostic online learner for Fe2e −M with regret bound 

O

p T L(F) log M



.

Below, we show that all sub-logarithmic well-behaved rates between √T and √T log M are attainable. Note that due to Theorem 9.1, going below order of √T regret is possible only in the case that the autoregressive process degenerates Fe2e −M to a single function. Therefore, this essentially establishes a complete taxonomy for agnostic online e2e -learning. 

Corollary 9.3. For any well-behaved sub-logarithmic growth rate r there exists a base class F

such that L(F) = 1 and the optimal regret bound for agnostic online learning Fe2e −M is 

Θ

p T · r(M )



for all M ≥ M0 and sufficiently large T .

A similar result holds also for logarithmic rates. 

Corollary 9.4. For any d ∈ N+, there exists a class F such that the optimal regret for agnostic online learning of Fe2e −M is 

Θ

p T d log M



for all M ≥ M0 and sufficiently large T .

# 10 Learning with chain-of-thought supervision 

In contrast to e2e -learning, we show that similarly to the statistical setting (see [HMM26]), the optimal mistake bound of learning a Littlestone class is independent of M .

Theorem 10.1. For every class F, and for every M , we have L(FCoT −M ) ≤ L(F).Proof. We use an SOA-style learner who realizes the stated mistake bound, described below. The learner maintains a valid version space V := Vt of F, which in the first round is V1 = F. Let 

x := xt be the instance given by the adversary in round t. The learner constructs the generation tree TM (x). For a branch b, let Vb be the version space V restricted to b. That is, those are all functions in V that agree with the branch b. We argue that there is at most one branch b⋆

so that L(Vb⋆ ) = L(V ). Indeed, suppose that there are two such branches b0, b 1. Let v be the internal node where these branches first split, and let v0, v 1 be the left and right children of v,where b0 goes through v0, and b1 goes through v1. So, the version space V restricted to both b0

up to v0 and b1 up to v1 has Littlestone dimension L(V ). Therefore, we can construct a tree of depth L(V ) + 1 which is rooted at v and is shattered by V , which is a contradiction. So, we determine the learner’s prediction in round t to be the label associated with the edges of the branch 

b⋆ := arg max  

> b∈B(TM(x))

L(Vb).

Now, if the learner errs and the correct label is b̸ = b⋆, then the learner updates Vt+1 = Vb,and L(Vt+1 ) < L(Vt). Telescoping over all rounds where the learner errs, at most L(F) many mistakes are made before L(Vt) = 0, and then a single consistent function remains, and the learner’s predictions are trivially given by this function from this round. 30 Note that in contrast with the e2e setting, here we cannot infer an agnostic regret bound from the realizable mistake bound. Indeed, since the learner of Theorem 10.1 learns the entire 

CoT , every change in the CoT counts as a mistake. Thus, it is possible that for some function in F the e2e -loss is extremely good, while for all functions in F the CoT -loss is very bad. In such case, the learner of Theorem 10.1 is measured with respect to the function with the best 

CoT -loss, its regret might be very bad when measured against the function with the best e2e -loss. It is an interesting direction for future research to prove that this obstacle can or cannot be circumvented by some learner. Using an online-to-batch conversion (Theorem 6.8), Theorem 10.1 immediately allows to derive a PAC sample complexity bound for learning FCoT −M .

Theorem 10.2 (Upper bound in terms of L(F)) . For every base class F ⊂ ΣΣ⋆

(even if |Σ| > 2,and even for |Σ| = ∞), and for all M , if L(F) < ∞ then FCoT −M is learnable with sample complexity 

m(ε, δ ) = O

 L(F) + log(1 /δ )

ε



.

# 11 Autoregressive Linear classifiers 

In this section, we study the base class of autoregressive linear classifiers in Rd. It is defined to only take into account the final d entries. Formally, define 

Fd, lin := {fw,b : w ∈ Rd, b ∈ R}

where the function fw,b is given as 

fw,b (x) = 1 



> min {d, |x|}

X

> i=1

w[−i]x[−i] + b ≥ 0



for all x ∈ Σ⋆.

11.1 Mistake and sample complexity bounds 

Fd, lin is essentially the class of linear classifiers over the d-cube. This immediately gives the following bound 

Proposition 11.1. For all M :

L(Fe2e −Md, lin ) = O(d2)

Proof. Trivial: The argument of [JVB +25, Lemma 4.1] shows that |F d, lin | ≤ 2O(d2). Since 

|F e2e −Md, lin | ≤ |F d, lin |, the standard halving algorithm implies the stated bound. The bound above is based on a simple size argument. It is natural to ask if it is tight. Below, we give a positive answer to this question, that holds even for CoT -learning. The idea is to implement a “latch” mechanism (like in digital systems) that “drags” the output bit of the base function throughout the entire CoT , and then just apply the best known bound for Fd, lin .

Theorem 11.2. There exists an adversary forcing Ω( d2) on any learner for Fe2e −Md, lin for all 

d ≥ 3 and M ≥ 2, even with CoT -supervision. 

31 The key is the following lemma, that provides the latch mechanism, in the price of reducing the dimension by 2. 

Lemma 11.3 (Latch lemma) . Fix d ≥ 3 and denote m := d − 2. Then, for all v ∈ Rm and 

c ∈ R, there exists fw,b ∈ F d, lin such that 

f e2e −M 

> w,b

(z10) = fv,c (z)

for all z ∈ { 0, 1}m and all M ≥ 2.Proof. Define 

L := min 

> z∈{ 0,1}m

⟨v, z ⟩ + c, U := max 

> z∈{ 0,1}m

⟨v, z ⟩ + c

and let B := max {0, U } + 1 , A := B − L + 1. We now define fw,b ∈ F d, lin that realizes the theorem. Let s(x) := ( u, p, q ) be the last d bits of an input x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ for fw,b , where 

|u| = d − 2, |p| = |q| = 1. Let 

w := ( v, B, 2A), b := c − B. 

Therefore, for any input x of length at least d we have: 

fw,b (x) = 1[ ⟨v, u ⟩ + Bp + 2 Aq + c − B ≥ 0] .

Now, we show that fw,b satisfies three desired properties: 1. For all z ∈ { 0, 1}m: fw,b (z10) = fv,c (z) (first bit of CoT is correct). 2. For any x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ with p = q = 0, we have fw,b (x) = 0 (always drag 0). 3. For any x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ with q = 1, we have fw,b (x) = 1 (always drag 1). The three items establish the statement of the lemma: The first item states that fw,b (z10) returns the “correct” bit fv,c (z). Then, since f e2e −M 

> w,b

appends the returned correct bit, precisely one of the following two states is reached: if fv,c (z) = 0, then the last two bits become 0, and the second item establishes that 0 is dragged through all M iterations. Otherwise, the last bit becomes 1, and then the third item guarantees that 1 is dragged through all M iterations. So it remains to prove the three items. 

First item. Let z ∈ { 0, 1}m, and denote x = z10. So 

⟨w, s (x)⟩ + b = ⟨v, z ⟩ + B + c − B = ⟨v, z ⟩ + c. 

Therefore, 

fw,b (x) = 1[ ⟨w, s (x)⟩ + b ≥ 0] = 1[ ⟨v, z ⟩ + c ≥ 0] = fv,c (z).

Second item. Let x such that p = q = 0. Then 

⟨w, s (x)⟩ + b = ⟨v, u ⟩ + c − B ≤ U − B < 0,

where the first inequality is by definition of U , and the second inequality is by definition of B.Therefore, fw,b (x) = 0 by definition. 32 Third item. Let x such that q = 1. Then 

⟨w, s (x)⟩ + b = ⟨v, u ⟩ + Bp + 2 A + c − B

≥ ⟨ v, u ⟩ + c + 2 A − B

≥ L + 2 A − B

= L + 2( B − L + 1) − B

= B − L + 2 

> 0.

The equalities are by definitions. The first inequality is since B > 0 and thus Bp ≥ 0. The second inequality is by definition of L. The last inequality is since B > U ≥ L. So, we have 

fw,b (x) = 1 by definition. We may now prove Theorem 11.2. 

Proof of Theorem 11.2. By [FX14, Theorem B.2], we have L(Fm, lin ) = Θ( m2) for all m ≥ 1. As the latch lemma shows, for every function fm ∈ F m, lin there is a function fd ∈ F d, lin where 

d = m + 2, such that for all z ∈ { 0, 1}m and all M ≥ 1 we have f e2e −Md (z10) = fm(z). Therefore, the same adversarial strategy realizing the Ω( m2) lower bound of [FX14] can be implemented by 

Fe2e −Md, lin , replacing any instance z ∈ { 0, 1}m with z10, and any fm ∈ F m, lin with the appropriate 

fd ∈ F d, lin . Therefore, 

L(Fe2e −Md, lin ) = Θ( m2) = Θ( d2)for all M . To see that the same lower bound holds even with CoT -supervision, note that the 

CoT is just M copies of the same bit, and so CoT -supervision is equivalent to only receiving the 

e2e output. The same technique allows to prove a lower bound for the statistical setting as well. 

Theorem 11.4. For all d ≥ 3 and M ≥ 2, any PAC-learner for Fe2e −Md, lin has sample complexity 

Ω( d), even with CoT -supervision. Proof. We prove that VC (Fe2e 

> d, lin

) ≥ m for m := d − 2. Since all functions we will use to shatter a set of size m are implemented by the latch mechanism of Lemma 11.3, those functions always copy the same final bit, and thus CoT -supervision is equivalent to only receiving the e2e output. Therefore, proving VC (Fe2e 

> d, lin

) ≥ m suffices for showing that m is a lower bound on the sample complexity, even with CoT -supervision. The proof now follows essentially the same lines as the proof of Theorem 11.2, only replacing the bound L(Fm, lin ) = Θ( m2) used in the proof of Theorem 11.2 to the known bound VC( Fm, lin ) ≥ m.

11.2 Bounds for Efficient learning 

We first show that efficient online e2e -learning of autoregressive linear thresholds is impossible, conditioned on the following assumption; we refer the reader to, e.g., [JVB +25] for more details. 

Assumption 11.5 (Hardness of Learning TC 0). There exist a constant L > 0 and a polynomial 

p(n) such that threshold circuits of depth L and size p(n) over n binary inputs are not weakly PAC-learnable in poly (n) time, i.e., for some constants ε < 12 and δ < 1, there is no polynomial-time learner that achieves error at most ε with confidence at least 1 − δ.

Based on the above assumption, we show that learning end-to-end autoregressive linear classifiers is impossible. The proof is based on a standard batch-to-online argument and using Theorem 4.4 in [JVB +25]. 33 Theorem 11.6 (Conditional hardness of efficient online e2e -learning) . Assume Hardness As-sumption 11.5. Then there is no possibly improper online learner such that, for every d, M, n ,on every realizable online sequence of examples from {0, 1}n labeled by some target in Fe2e −Md, lin ,the learner runs in time polynomial in d, M, n per round and makes at most polynomially many mistakes in d, M, n .Proof. Suppose such a learner exists. By the standard reduction from realizable online learning with polynomial mistake bound to realizable PAC learning, this yields a polynomial-time realizable PAC learner for Fe2e −Md, lin over {0, 1}n. This contradicts [JVB +25, Theorem 4.4]. In contrast, with CoT -supervision there is an efficient online learner matching the information-theoretic guarantee up to a logarithmic factor. We use the classical deterministic online learner for Boolean linear thresholds. We first give a reduction 

Lemma 11.7 (Online reduction with CoT -supervision) . Let F ⊆ { f : {0, 1}⋆ → { 0, 1}} be a base class. Assume there is a deterministic online learner A for F such that: 1. on every realizable sequence it makes at most K mistakes; 2. on every length-L sequence, its total computation time is polynomial in L and the total input length. Then for every M ≥ 1 there is a deterministic online learner B for Fe2e −M with CoT -supervision such that: 1. on every realizable CoT -supervised sequence it makes at most K mistakes; 2. on every length-n sequence, its total computation time is polynomial in n, M, and the total input length. Proof. Fix a realizable CoT -supervised sequence ( xt, z t)nt=1 , where zt = ( zt, 1, . . . , z t,M ) = 

f CoT −M⋆ (xt) for some f⋆ ∈ F. For each round s, let us, 0 := xs, and for j ∈ [M ] let 

us,j := us,j −1zs,j , where for a binary string u and a bit b ∈ { 0, 1}, ub denotes the string obtained by appending b to u. Learner B maintains the ordered transcript 

St−1 :=  (u1,0, z 1,1), . . . , (u1,M −1, z 1,M ), . . . , (ut−1,0, z t−1,1), . . . , (ut−1,M −1, z t−1,M ).

On round t, learner B sets ˆut, 0 := xt. For j = 1 , . . . , M , suppose ˆzt, 1, . . . , ˆzt,j −1 have already been defined and ˆ ut,j −1 has been formed. Learner B runs A from scratch on the sequence 

St−1, (ˆ ut, 0, ˆzt, 1), . . . , (ˆ ut,j −2, ˆzt,j −1),

where for j = 1 this means just St−1, and lets ˆzt,j be the prediction on the next example ˆut,j −1;then it sets ˆut,j := ˆut,j −1 ˆzt,j . Finally, it predicts ˆzt,M . After receiving the true chain-of-thought 

zt = ( zt, 1, . . . , z t,M ), it updates the transcript to 

St :=  St−1, (ut, 0, z t, 1), . . . , (ut,M −1, z t,M ).

Now consider the expanded sequence (( ut,j −1, z t,j )) 1≤t≤n, 1≤j≤M .

It is realizable by f⋆, since zt,j = f⋆(ut,j −1) for all t, j . If B makes a mistake on round t, let 

j be the first index with ˆzt,j ̸ = zt,j . Then ˆut,i = ut,i for all i < j , so the transcript used by B

to compute ˆzt,j is exactly the prefix of the expanded realizable sequence seen by A just before 34 processing ( ut,j −1, z t,j ). Hence A makes a mistake on that example. Therefore every final-answer mistake of B is charged to a distinct mistake of A, and so B makes at most K mistakes. Finally, the expanded sequence has length at most nM , and its total input length is 

> n

X

> t=1
> M

X

> j=1

|ut,j −1| =

> n

X

> t=1
> M

X

> j=1

(|xt| + j − 1) ≤ M

> n

X

> t=1

|xt| + nM 2,

which is polynomial in n, M, and the total input length of the original sequence. The same bound holds for every simulated prefix sequence used by B, since |ˆut,j | = |xt| + j for all t, j . Since 

B performs at most nM simulations, and each simulation runs A from scratch on a sequence of length at most nM and polynomially bounded total input length, the total computation time of 

B is polynomial in n, M, and the total input length of the original sequence. To obtain our efficient algorithm, we use the following classic result for the base class. 

Lemma 11.8 (Maass–Tur´ an [MT94]) . There exists a deterministic online learner for Boolean linear thresholds over {0, 1}d such that: 1. on every realizable sequence it makes at most O(d2 log d) mistakes; 2. on every length-m sequence, its total computation time is polynomial in m and d.

Theorem 11.9 (Efficient online CoT -learning for autoregressive linear thresholds) . Fix a horizon 

n. There exists a deterministic online learner for Fe2e −Md, lin with CoT -supervision such that, for every sequence (xt, z t)nt=1 satisfying zt = f CoT −M⋆ (xt) for some f⋆ ∈ F d, lin , the learner makes at most O(d2 log d) mistakes and its total computation time is polynomial in n, d, M, and Pnt=1 |xt|.Proof. Let ϕ : {0, 1}⋆ → { 0, 1}d be the suffix map returning the last d bits, padded with leading zeroes if needed. By definition of Fd, lin , for every f ∈ F d, lin there is a Boolean linear threshold 

gf : {0, 1}d → { 0, 1} such that f (x) = gf (ϕ(x)) for all x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆.Let A be the learner from Lemma 11.8. We define a learner A′ for Fd, lin as follows: on an example x, learner A′ predicts whatever A predicts on ϕ(x); after receiving the label y, learner 

A′ updates A on the labeled example ( ϕ(x), y ). Since f (x) = gf (ϕ(x)), every realizable sequence for Fd, lin maps to a realizable sequence for Boolean linear thresholds over {0, 1}d. Hence A′

makes at most O(d2 log d) mistakes on every realizable sequence. Its total computation time on any length-m sequence is polynomial in m, d, and the total input length, since computing all suffixes ϕ(x) contributes only linear overhead. Applying Lemma 11.7 to the base class Fd, lin and the learner A′ yields the claim. 

# 12 Non-Littlestone base classes 

Theorem 12.1. There exists a base class F over the binary alphabet Σ = {0, 1} such that, for the pairwise distinct sequence 

Mi := i + 4 (i ∈ N),

the following holds: 

i odd =⇒ L(Fe2e −Mi ) = 0 , i even =⇒ L(Fe2e −Mi ) = ∞.

Moreover, for every odd i, online learning with CoT -supervision has a finite mistake bound, while for every even i, online learning with CoT -supervision is impossible. 

35 Proof. For every m ≥ 2 and n ≥ 0, define the string 

um,n := 0 m10 n1.

For every binary array α = ( αm,n )m≥2, n ≥0 ∈ { 0, 1}{2,3,... }× (N∪{ 0}), define a next-token generator 

fα : {0, 1}⋆ → { 0, 1}

as follows: 

fα(x) = 



αm,n if x = um,n for some m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0,

0 if x = um,n b0t for some m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, b ∈ { 0, 1}, 0 ≤ t < 2m − 2,b if x = um,n b02m−2 for some m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, b ∈ { 0, 1},

0 otherwise. Let 

F := {fα : α ∈ { 0, 1}{2,3,... }× (N∪{ 0})}.

We first analyze the even horizons. Fix m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, and α. Let b := αm,n . Starting from the input um,n , the generated bits are 

b, 0, . . . , 0

| {z }

> 2m−2 times

, b. 

Therefore, 

f e2e −2mα (um,n ) = αm,n .

Hence, for every fixed m ≥ 2, the set 

Xm := {um,n : n ≥ 0}

shows that Fe2e −2m has infinite Littlestone dimension. Indeed, let d ∈ N, and consider the complete binary tree of depth d in which every node at depth j is labeled by um,j −1. Given any branch-label sequence y1, . . . , y d ∈ { 0, 1}, choose α so that 

αm,j −1 = yj for all j = 1 , . . . , d, 

and define the remaining coordinates of α arbitrarily. Then 

f e2e −2mα (um,j −1) = yj for all j = 1 , . . . , d. 

Thus this tree is shattered by Fe2e −2m. Since d is arbitrary, 

L(Fe2e −2m) = ∞ for every m ≥ 2.

Moreover, this lower bound is unchanged under CoT -supervision. Indeed, for every queried instance um,n , if b := αm,n , then the revealed 2 m-step chain is 

f CoT −2mα (um,n ) = b02m−2b. 

In particular, the revealed CoT is completely determined by the final label 

f e2e −2mα (um,n ) = b. 

36 Hence, on the adversarial sequence above, a learner with CoT -supervision receives no more information than an e2e -learner, so the same lower bound applies. We now turn to odd horizons. Fix an odd M ≥ 5. We claim that all functions in Fe2e −M

coincide, and therefore L(Fe2e −M ) = 0. Fix x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆ and two arrays α, β . We show that 

f e2e −Mα (x) = f e2e −Mβ (x).

We will use the following simple observation: for every m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, b ∈ { 0, 1}, and r ≥ 0, the string 

um,n b02m−2b0r

is of none of the special forms appearing in the definition of fα. Indeed, if it were of the form 

um′,n ′ or um′,n ′ c0t, then necessarily m′ = m and n′ = n, since the first two occurrences of 1 already determine the prefix um,n . But then the remaining suffix b02m−2b0r cannot be empty, and also cannot equal c0t: if b = 1 then it contains two 1’s, while if b = 0 it equals 0 2m+r, which would force c = 0 and t = 2 m + r − 1 > 2m − 2. Thus no such string is special. We now distinguish three cases. 

Case 1: x = um,n for some m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0. Let b := αm,n . Under fα, the first generated bit is b, the next 2 m − 2 generated bits are 0, and the 2 m-th generated bit is again b. After these 2m steps, the current string is 

um,n b02m−2b. 

By the observation above, from this point on, only the default rule applies, so all subsequent generated bits are 0. Therefore the only possibly α-dependent generated bits occur at steps 1 and 2 m. Since M ≥ 5 is odd it holds that M̸ = 1 and M̸ = 2 m, and hence f e2e −Mα (x) is independent of α. In particular, 

f e2e −Mα (x) = f e2e −Mβ (x).

Case 2: x = um,n b0t for some m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, b ∈ { 0, 1}, 0 ≤ t ≤ 2m − 2. Starting from x,the next 2 m − 2 − t generated bits are 0, then the next generated bit is b, and after that the current string has the form 

um,n b02m−2b. 

By the observation above, from this point on, all subsequent generated bits are 0. Therefore, the entire future trajectory from x is determined by the string x itself, and in particular is independent of α. Hence 

f e2e −Mα (x) = f e2e −Mβ (x).

Case 3: x is of neither of the above two forms. Then fα(x) = fβ (x) = 0. As long as the autoregressive trajectory stays outside the set 

{um,n : m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0} ∪ { um,n b0t : m ≥ 2, n ≥ 0, b ∈ { 0, 1}, 0 ≤ t ≤ 2m − 2},

both functions continue to output 0. If the trajectory never enters this set, then clearly 

f e2e −Mα (x) = f e2e −Mβ (x) = 0 .

Otherwise, let s ≥ 1 be the first time such a string is reached. Since all bits generated before time s are 0, the reached string cannot be of the form um,n , because every um,n ends with 1. 37 Hence at time s the trajectory reaches a string covered by Case 2, and from that point on the continuation is independent of α. Therefore 

f e2e −Mα (x) = f e2e −Mβ (x).

We have proved that for every odd M ≥ 5, all functions in Fe2e −M are identical. Hence 

|F e2e −M | = 1 , so L(Fe2e −M ) = 0 .

Therefore, for every odd M ≥ 5, online learning with CoT -supervision is also possible, since 

CoT -supervision is only more informative than e2e -supervision. Finally, for the pairwise distinct sequence Mi = i + 4, if i is even then Mi is even and at least 6, so 

L(Fe2e −Mi ) = ∞,

and moreover, the same impossibility holds even for online learning with CoT -supervision. If i is odd then Mi is odd and at least 5, so 

L(Fe2e −Mi ) = 0 < ∞,

and therefore online learning with CoT -supervision is also possible. 

# 13 Stochastic Autoregressive Lower Bound 

We now consider a stochastic variant of the autoregressive model. 

Definition 13.1 (Stochastic autoregressive next-token generators) . A stochastic base class is a class 

G ⊆ { g : {0, 1}⋆ → ∆( {0, 1})},

where ∆( {0, 1}) denotes the set of distributions over {0, 1}. For g ∈ G and x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆, define ¯g(x) to be the random string obtained by sampling Y ∼ g(x) and outputting append (x, Y ). For M ∈ N, define gCoT −M and ge2e −M exactly as in the deterministic case, except that these are now induced distributions obtained by composing ¯g for M many steps. As before, write 

Ge2e −M := {ge2e −M : g ∈ G} .In the associated online prediction problem, on round t the learner receives an instance 

xt ∈ { 0, 1}⋆, predicts a bit ˆyt ∈ { 0, 1}, and then observes a random label Yt, sampled from the relevant target distribution. In the direct next-token problem we have Yt ∼ g⋆(xt), while in the 

e2e problem we have Yt ∼ ge2e −M⋆ (xt), for some unknown g⋆ ∈ G . For a learner A, target g⋆,and instance sequence ( xt)Tt=1 , define the expected regret relative to the optimal prediction Reg T (A, g ⋆, (xt)) := E

" TX

> t=1

1[ˆ yt̸ = Yt]

#

−

> T

X

> t=1

min  

> a∈{ 0,1}

Pr[ a̸ = Yt].

Theorem 13.2. For every odd M ≥ 1 there exists a stochastic base class G = {g−, g +} such that: 1. there exists an online learner for the direct next-token problem on G whose expected regret is O(1) on every instance sequence; 2. for every (possibly randomized) online learner A for Ge2e −M , there exists a target g⋆ ∈ G 

such that, even on the constant sequence xt = ∅, its expected regret is Ω(2 M ) at some horizon T = Θ(4 M ).

38 In particular, the e2e regret can be Ω  2M , much larger than log M which is the upper bound growth of e2e -learning with a fixed Littlestone dimension base class (given in Theorem 7.1) in the standard (deterministic functions) model. 

Proof. For x ∈ { 0, 1}⋆, let b(x) denote the last bit of x, with the convention b(∅) = 0. For 

σ ∈ {− 1, +1 } define 

gσ(x) = law of b(x) ⊕ Z, Z ∼ Ber 

 12 + σ

4



.

Thus g− flips the current last bit with probability 1 /4, whereas g+ flips it with probability 3 /4. We first prove the first item in the theorem, that learning the direct next token is trivial. Fix a target gσ and an arbitrary instance sequence ( xt)Tt=1 . Define Zt := Yt ⊕ b(xt). Then Z1, Z 2, . . . 

are i.i.d. Ber ( 12 + σ 

> 4

), independently of the instance sequence. Consider the learner that predicts arbitrarily on round 1, and on round t ≥ 2 computes the empirical mean ¯Zt−1 := 1

> t−1

Pt−1 

> s=1

Zs,sets ˆσt = +1 if ¯Zt−1 ≥ 12 and ˆσt = −1 otherwise, and then predicts b(xt) if ˆσt = −1 and 1 − b(xt)if ˆσt = +1. If ˆσt = σ, this is the Bayes-optimal prediction for gσ(xt); otherwise the regret at round t is exactly 3 /4 − 1/4 = 1 /2. Hence, Reg T ≤ 12 + 12

> T

X

> t=2

Pr[ˆ σt̸ = σ].

Since the true mean is either 1 /4 or 3 /4, Hoeffding’s inequality gives Pr [ ˆσt̸ = σ] ≤ e−(t−1) /8, and therefore Reg T = O(1). We now prove the second item. If M = 1, then ge2e −1 

> σ

= gσ. On the constant sequence 

xt = ∅, the two targets induce Ber (1 /4) and Ber (3 /4). On round 1, if the learner predicts 1 with probability p, then its expected regret is p/ 2 under g− and (1 − p)/2 under g+. Thus one of the two targets yields regret at least 1 /4 at horizon T = 1, which is Ω(2 M ) for M = 1. So it remains to consider odd M ≥ 3. Fix such an odd M , and again consider the constant sequence xt = ∅. Let qσm be the probability that after m autoregressive steps the current last bit equals 1 under gσ, starting from ∅. The process is a two-state Markov chain, and 

qσm+1 =

 12 + σ

4



+



1 − 2

 12 + σ

4

 

qσm, qσ 

> 0

= 0 .

Solving this recursion gives qσm = 1−(−σ/ 2) m 

> 2

. Since M is odd, qσM = 12 + σ2−M −1. Let 

δM := 2 −M −1. Hence on input ∅, the final answer under ge2e −M 

> −

is Ber ( 12 − δM ), while under 

ge2e −M 

> +

it is Ber ( 12 + δM ). The Bayes-optimal predictions are therefore 0 and 1 respectively, and using the wrong one incurs regret 2 δM per round. Fix any randomized learner A. Its prior-averaged expected regret under the uniform prior on {g−, g +} is the expectation, over the learner’s internal randomness, of the corresponding quantity for the induced deterministic learner. It therefore suffices to prove the lower bound for deterministic learners. Fix such a deterministic learner. On round t, its prediction is a function of the first t − 1observed labels. Let P t−1 

> −

and P t−1+ denote the distributions of these t−1 labels under Ber ( 12 −δM )and Ber ( 12 + δM ) respectively, and let At be the event that the learner predicts 1 on round t.Since the Bayes-optimal prediction is 0 under g− and 1 under g+, the prior-averaged probability of predicting the wrong Bayes-optimal bit at round t is 12 P t−1 

> −

(At) + 12 P t−1+ (Act ).

39 By the Bretagnolle–Huber inequality [LS20, Theorem 14.2], 

P t−1 

> −

(At) + P t−1+ (Act ) ≥ 12 exp  −KL( P t−1 

> −

, P t−1+ ) ,

where KL (P, Q ) denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence from P to Q. Therefore the prior-averaged probability of predicting the wrong Bayes-optimal bit is at least 14 exp  −KL( P t−1 

> −

, P t−1+ ) .

It remains to bound the divergence. Since the labels are i.i.d., KL( P t−1 

> −

, P t−1+ ) = ( t − 1) KL 



Ber 

 12 − δM



, Ber 

 12 + δM

 

.

Moreover, KL 



Ber 

 12 − δ



, Ber 

 12 + δ

 

= 2 δ log 

 1 + 2 δ

1 − 2δ



≤ 16 δ2 (δ ≤ 1/4) ,

where the inequality uses log 

 1+ u

> 1−u



≤ 4u for u ∈ [0 , 1/2]. Hence KL( P t−1 

> −

, P t−1+ ) ≤ 16( t − 1) δ2 

> M

.

Thus, whenever t ≤ 1/(32 δ2 

> M

), we have KL (P t−1 

> −

, P t−1+ ) ≤ 1/2, and so the prior-averaged probability of predicting the wrong Bayes-optimal bit is at least 14 e−1/2 = Ω(1). Since each such mistake contributes regret 2 δM , the prior-averaged regret at round t is Ω( δM ). Setting T := 

j 132 δ2

> M

k

, we have T = Θ(4 M ). Summing over rounds t = 1 , . . . , T , the prior-averaged regret up to time T is Ω( T δ M ) = Ω(1 /δ M ) = Ω(2 M ). Therefore at least one of the two targets g−, g + yields regret Ω(2 M ) at horizon T = Θ(4 M ). 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Steve Hanneke and Shay Moran for their significant contribution to this work, and concretely for suggesting the class and the lower bound proof strategy in Theorem 2.4. Idan Mehalel is supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2022 research and innovation program (grant agreement No. 101041711), the Israel Science Foundation (grant number 2258/19), and the Simons Foundation (as part of the Collaboration on the Mathematical and Scientific Foundations of Deep Learning). Ilan Doron-Arad is supported by grant NSF DMS-2031883 and Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship ONR-N00014-20-1-2826 (PI Mossel). Elchanan Mossel is partially supported by NSF DMS-2031883, Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship ONR-N00014-20-1-2826, MURI N000142412742, and a Simons Investigator Award. 

# References 

[ABCM25] Benny Applebaum, Dung Bui, Geoffroy Couteau, and Nikolas Melissaris. Structured-seed local pseudorandom generators and their applications. In Ap-proximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM 2025) , volume 353, pages 63–1. Schloss Dagstuhl– Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik, 2025. 40 [ABED +21] Noga Alon, Omri Ben-Eliezer, Yuval Dagan, Shay Moran, Moni Naor, and Eylon Yogev. Adversarial laws of large numbers and optimal regret in online classification. In Proceedings of the 53rd annual ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing ,pages 447–455, 2021. [ABL +22] Noga Alon, Mark Bun, Roi Livni, Maryanthe Malliaris, and Shay Moran. Private and online learnability are equivalent. ACM Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 69(4):1– 34, 2022. [ABW10] Benny Applebaum, Boaz Barak, and Avi Wigderson. Public-key cryptography from different assumptions. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pages 171–180, 2010. [AML25] Awni Altabaa, Omar Montasser, and John Lafferty. Cot information: Im-proved sample complexity under chain-of-thought supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15927 , 2025. [BDPSS09] Shai Ben-David, D´ avid P´ al, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Agnostic online learning. In COLT , 2009. [BEHW89] Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K Warmuth. Learnability and the vapnik-chervonenkis dimension. Journal of the ACM (JACM) ,36(4):929–965, 1989. [Bha21] Siddharth Bhaskar. Thicket density. The Journal of Symbolic Logic , 86(1):110–127, 2021. [BMR +20] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Ben-jamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual , 2020. [CM24] Zachary Chase and Idan Mehalel. Deterministic apple tasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10404 , 2024. [CPW25] Lijie Chen, Binghui Peng, and Hongxun Wu. Theoretical limitations of multi-layer transformer. In 2025 IEEE 66th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 2631–2653. IEEE, 2025. [DGY +25] DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Honghui Ding, 41 Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shengfeng Ye, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, and S. S. Li. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. CoRR ,abs/2501.12948, 2025. URL: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.12948 ,

arXiv:2501.12948 , doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2501.12948 .[DJP +24] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aur´ elien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Rozi` ere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail, Gr´ egoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel M. Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, and et al. The llama 3 herd of models. CoRR , abs/2407.21783, 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.2407.21783 , arXiv:2407.21783 , doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2407.21783 .[DSBDSS15] Amit Daniely, Sivan Sabato, Shai Ben-David, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Multiclass learnability and the ERM principle. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 16(1):2377–2404, 2015. [DSS16] Amit Daniely and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Complexity theoretic limitations on learning dnf’s. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 815–830. PMLR, 2016. [DV21] Amit Daniely and Gal Vardi. From local pseudorandom generators to hardness of learning. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 1358–1394. PMLR, 2021. [EHKV89] Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, Michael Kearns, and Leslie Valiant. Ageneral lower bound on the number of examples needed for learning. Information and Computation , 82(3):247–261, 1989. [FHMM23] Yuval Filmus, Steve Hanneke, Idan Mehalel, and Shay Moran. Optimal prediction using expert advice and randomized littlestone dimension. In COLT , volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 773–836. PMLR, 2023. 42 [FX14] Vitaly Feldman and David Xiao. Sample complexity bounds on differentially private learning via communication complexity. In Conference on Learning Theory ,pages 1000–1019. PMLR, 2014. [Han16] Steve Hanneke. The optimal sample complexity of pac learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(38):1–15, 2016. [HM26] Steve Hanneke and Shay Moran. Private communication. Unpublished, 2026. Private communication with the authors. [HMM26] Steve Hanneke, Idan Mehalel, and Shay Moran. Sample complexity of autoregressive reasoning: Chain-of-thought vs. end-to-end. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12013 , 2026. 

arXiv:2604.12013 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.12013 .[HWS +25] Yu Huang, Zixin Wen, Aarti Singh, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. Transformers provably learn chain-of-thought reasoning with length generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07378 , 2025. [JKL +24] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, Alex If-timie, Alex Karpenko, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Neitz, Alexander Prokofiev, Alexander Wei, Allison Tam, Ally Bennett, Ananya Kumar, Andre Saraiva, Andrea Vallone, Andrew Duberstein, Andrew Kondrich, Andrey Mishchenko, Andy Apple-baum, Angela Jiang, Ashvin Nair, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben Rossen, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Boaz Barak, Bob McGrew, Borys Minaiev, Botao Hao, Bowen Baker, Brandon Houghton, Brandon McKinzie, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Chak Ming Li, Charles de Bourcy, Chelsea Voss, Chen Shen, Chong Zhang, Chris Koch, Chris Orsinger, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clive Chan, Dan Roberts, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levy, Daniel Selsam, David Dohan, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Dragos Oprica, Eben Freeman, Eddie Zhang, Edmund Wong, Elizabeth Proehl, Enoch Cheung, Eric Mitchell, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Evan Mays, Fan Wang, Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Florencia Leoni, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Francis Song, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Geoff Salmon, Giambattista Paras-candolo, Gildas Chabot, Grace Zhao, Greg Brockman, Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Hao Sheng, Hart Andrin, Hessam Bagherinezhad, Hongyu Ren, Hunter Lightman, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ignasi Clavera Gilaberte, and Ilge Akkaya. Openai o1 system card. CoRR ,abs/2412.16720, 2024. arXiv:2412.16720 , doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2412.16720 .[JMS +26] Nirmit Joshi, Roey Magen, Nathan Srebro, Nikolaos Tsilivis, and Gal Vardi. Learning to think from multiple thinkers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24737 , 2026. [JVB +25] Nirmit Joshi, Gal Vardi, Adam Block, Surbhi Goel, Zhiyuan Li, Theodor Misi-akiewicz, and Nathan Srebro. A theory of learning with autoregressive chain of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07932 , 2025. [KS09] Adam R Klivans and Alexander A Sherstov. Cryptographic hardness for learning intersections of halfspaces. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 75(1):2–12, 2009. [KS24] Juno Kim and Taiji Suzuki. Transformers provably solve parity efficiently with chain of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08633 , 2024. 43 [Lit88] Nick Littlestone. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: A new linear-threshold algorithm. Machine learning , 2(4):285–318, 1988. [Lit89] Nick Littlestone. From on-line to batch learning. In Proceedings of the Second Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 1989) , pages 269– 284, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1989. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. URL: 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/93335.93365 , doi:10.5555/93335.93365 .[LLZM24] Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to solve inherently serial problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [LS20] Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesv´ ari. Bandit algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2020. [Mal23] Eran Malach. Auto-regressive next-token predictors are universal learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06979 , 2023. [MS23] William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07923 , 2023. [MT94] Wolfgang Maass and Gy¨ orgy Tur´ an. How fast can a threshold gate learn? In 

Computational Learning Theory and Natural Learning Systems, Vol. I , pages 381–414. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994. [NAG +21] Maxwell I. Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. CoRR , abs/2112.00114, 2021. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114 , arXiv:2112.00114 .[RWC +19] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI , 2019. [Ser25] Rocco A Servedio. The probably approximately correct learning model in compu-tational learning theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08791 , 2025. [Tie24] Stefan Tiegel. Improved hardness results for learning intersections of halfspaces. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory , pages 4764–4786. PMLR, 2024. [TMUK25] Nikolaos Tsilivis, Eran Malach, Karen Ullrich, and Julia Kempe. How reinforce-ment learning after next-token prediction facilitates learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11495 , 2025. [VSP +17] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , pages 5998–6008, 2017. 44 [WBZ +22] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 , 2022. [WWS +22] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:24824–24837, 2022. 45