Title: SACHI: Structured Agent Coordination via Holistic Information Integration in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08391v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:30:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> 1

# SACHI : Structured Agent Coordination via Holistic Information Integration in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Nikunj Gupta 1, James Zachary Hare 2, Jesse Milzman 2, Rajgopal Kannan 3, Viktor Prasanna 11University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

> 2

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA 

> 3

DEVCOM Army Research Office, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA 

Emails: {nikunj, prasanna }@usc.edu {james.z.hare, jesse.m.milzman, rajgopal.kannan }.civ@army.mil 

Abstract —Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning agents that act on partial local observations face a fundamental information bottleneck: the knowledge needed to select jointly optimal actions is scattered across the team, yet each agent must commit to a decision without access to its teammates’ observations, intentions, or chosen actions. Existing methods either ignore this bottleneck, compress it into a scalar mixing signal, or route around it with learned communication channels. Framing action coordination as a problem of structured infor-mation integration among agents, we propose structured agent coordination via holistic information integration , or SACHI , in which graph transformer convolutions over an inter-agent coor-dination graph enrich each agent’s representation with receiver-sensitive, content-dependent signals from teammates prior to action selection. We evaluate SACHI across five cooperative tasks spanning spatial, communicative, and adversarial coordination challenges against twelve baselines. SACHI consistently matches or outperforms the best baseline on every task, and rigorous aggregate statistical analyses, including normalized metrics with bootstrap confidence intervals, Friedman ranking, and perfor-mance profiling, confirm that this advantage is statistically significant, robust across environments, and not attributable to increased model capacity. Parameter-matched ablations further trace the source of the gains to a single architectural property: the degree of content-dependence in the message-passing operator. 

Impact Statement —This paper advances the scientific under-standing of coordination in multi-agent systems by framing action coordination as a problem of structured information integration. The methods developed here are intended to improve the performance of cooperative autonomous systems in settings where effective teamwork is essential, including robotics, logistics, and resource allocation. We foresee no immediate ethical concerns arising from this work. As with any advance in autonomous decision-making, the broader societal implications depend largely on the contexts in which these methods are deployed, and we encourage responsible application. 

Index Terms —Multi-agent reinforcement learning, cooperative agents, action coordination, coordination graphs, graph neural networks, graph transformers. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Coordination, the alignment of individual decisions toward a shared objective, is among the oldest and most consequential problems in the study of organized systems [1]. From assembly lines to air-traffic control, success depends not on any single actor in isolation but on the degree to which many actors select mutually compatible actions under uncertainty. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) inherits this challenge in full generality: a team of agents must learn a joint policy under which each agent’s action is individually executable yet collectively coherent, often from partial and local observations of a shared environment [2, 3]. The past decade has seen a remarkable influx of cooperative MARL algorithms, spanning value decomposition [4, 5], communication learning, and policy-gradient methods [6, 7], motivated by applications in autonomous driving, warehouse logistics, robotic manipula-tion, and network routing [8, 9, 10]. Yet across this landscape, a persistent difficulty remains: how should a joint policy be structured so that each agent’s locally-computed action is compatible with the actions of teammates it cannot observe? To appreciate why action coordination is difficult, it helps to first consider a setting where it is not. Imagine a team of delivery drones operating in non-overlapping zones of a city: each drone plans its own route independently, and the fleet’s total throughput is simply the sum of individual deliveries. A policy that maximizes each agent’s individual return also maximizes the team’s, so no coordination of actions is required. Now extend the scenario. Suppose zones overlap and two drones approaching the same rooftop must yield to avoid collision; the action each drone should take now depends on the action the other is taking, and a policy that ignores this coupling will produce collisions no matter how well each agent optimizes locally [11]. Add heterogeneity: heavy packages demand larger drones and narrow alleys require smaller ones, so the optimal action for one agent is contingent on the assignments of others. Introduce time coupling: a drone occupying a rooftop landing pad blocks a second drone carrying a perishable item, so even the order in which agents act must be jointly determined. At each extension, individual action optimality becomes insufficient. What matters is whether the joint action profile, the vector of all agents’ simultaneous choices, is coherent as a whole. This joint coherence under decentralized execution is the defining challenge of action coordination in cooperative MARL. One of the most subtle impediments to action coordina-tion arises in settings where agents are fully aligned: every member of the team shares the same preference ranking over 

> arXiv:2605.08391v1 [cs.LG] 8 May 2026 2

Fig. 1: Solving the MARL Information Bottleneck. (a) Each agent holds only a fragment of the information needed to determine the globally optimal joint action; (b) Since agents cannot see their teammates’ observations or intentions, their independent “rational” choices often lead to group failure; (c)  

> SACHI

resolves this by allowing agents to intelligently filter and “borrow” relevant context from teammates through graph transformer layers; and (d) Enriched internal representations allow agents to act independently at runtime while maintaining perfect joint alignment. group outcomes, and any joint action profile that raises one agent’s payoff raises everyone’s. In such cooperative teams, the difficulty is not conflicting incentives but the structural problem of producing a coherent joint action from decentral-ized decisions [2]. Each agent controls only its own action and observes only a local view of the environment, yet the value of that action depends on the actions simultaneously chosen by its teammates. A search-and-rescue squad may unanimously want to cover a disaster site as quickly as possible, yet if each rescuer independently selects the nearest uncovered sector, the resulting joint action profile leaves critical zones unvisited regardless of how rational each individual choice appears in isolation. Producing a jointly optimal action profile, therefore, requires each agent’s policy to be conditioned not only on its own observations but also on information that makes teammates’ actions predictable and mutually consistent. The central challenge, then, is how to act when the information needed to select a compatible action is distributed across agents with no mechanism to assemble it. In this paper, we address this action-coordination challenge directly by targeting the information bottleneck that pre-vents decentralized policies from producing coherent joint ac-tions. We propose Structured Agent Coordination via Holistic 

Information Integration ( SACHI ), where holistic reflects the principle that effective coordination does not require an agent to collect all available information from all teammates indis-criminately, but rather to intelligently accumulate precisely the coordination-relevant signals it needs from its neighbors. It must filter, weight, and integrate incoming information in a manner that is sensitive to the agent’s own state and role. SACHI achieves this by enriching each agent’s policy input through graph transformer convolutions [12] over an inter-agent coordination graph, in which content-dependent attention determines not only which neighboring agents con-tribute to a given representation but how much and in what form their information is incorporated. The coordination graph encodes which agents’ actions are coupled; the graph trans-former determines what information flows between them and 

how each agent integrates incoming signals given its own state. The result is a set of enriched representations (one per agent) that carry precisely the information needed for each agent’s locally computed action to be compatible with its teammates’, enabling decentralized policies to jointly solve the coordination problem. By resolving action coordination at the representation level, SACHI provides a principled approach to producing coherent joint behavior from individually acting agents. Our contributions are as follows. First, we offer a conceptual reframing of action coordination in cooperative MARL as a policy-level problem of structured information integration, arguing that decentralized agents cannot reliably produce co-herent joint actions unless each agent’s representation reflects the broader joint context. Second, we propose SACHI , apractical instantiation of this perspective that enriches agent representations through graph transformer message passing over a coordination graph, and combines these representations with value decomposition to support fully decentralized ex-ecution at test time. Third, we provide an empirical evalua-tion across five cooperative multi-agent tasks spanning spa-tial, communicative, and adversarial coordination challenges, showing consistent improvements over established baselines and confirming through ablation studies that the gains are attributable to the coordination mechanism itself rather than increased model capacity. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Cooperative MARL 

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning addresses the problem of training a team of agents to maximize a shared objective through interaction with a common environ-ment [13, 14]. Early approaches extended single-agent RL directly to the multi-agent setting, either by training agents independently [15, 16] or by treating the joint action space as a single agent’s action space [17], both of which scale poorly as the number of agents grows. A central difficulty in cooperative MARL is the non-stationarity introduced by simultaneously learning agents: from any single agent’s per-spective, the environment appears to change as its teammates update their policies, violating the stationarity assumptions underlying standard RL convergence guarantees [14]. More recent work has addressed this through communication learn-ing [18, 19, 20], role-based decomposition [21, 22], and emergent coordination strategies [6, 7]. A growing body of work also examines scalability and generalization in large teams [5, 23], as well as the theoretical foundations of multi-agent credit assignment [24]. The present work situates itself within this landscape by targeting action coordination as a first-class problem, treating it as a policy-level challenge that requires structured information integration among agents rather than a byproduct of reward maximization. 3

B. Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution 

The centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm [2, 25] has become the dominant framework for cooperative MARL, allowing agents to exploit global information during training while retaining the ability to act independently at execution time. Within CTDE, value decomposition methods address the credit assignment problem by factoring the joint action-value function into per-agent components. VDN [4] assumes the joint value is an additive sum of individual values, while QMIX [5] relaxes this to a monotonic combination conditioned on the global state, enabling richer joint value representations while preserving the consistency between centralized training and decentralized execution. QTRAN [26] and QPLEX [27] further extend the representable class of joint value functions at the cost of increased complexity. On the actor-critic side, COMA [28] uses a centralized critic with a counterfactual baseline for credit assignment, and MAPPO [7] demonstrates that ashared centralized critic with proximal policy optimization can achieve strong performance across a wide range of cooperative tasks. The present work builds on CTDE and adopts QMIX as its value decomposition backbone, augmenting the agent representation stage with structured inter-agent information exchange prior to action-value estimation. 

C. Graph-Based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Graph-based methods have attracted considerable interest in MARL as a natural framework for modeling structured agent interactions. Coordination graphs (CGs) [29] represent the factored structure of the joint value function as a graph over agents, enabling exact or approximate inference of the optimal joint action via message passing. Deep coordination graphs (DCG) [30] integrate CGs with deep RL by learning per-edge payoff functions and performing max-sum inference at execution time. DICG [31] introduces a dynamic interaction graph inferred from agent observations, allowing the coordina-tion topology to adapt to the current state. LTSCG [32] further learns a sparse coordination graph through a self-organizing mechanism, reducing unnecessary coordination overhead, and SOPCG [33] conditions the coordination graph on the global context to produce task-relevant interaction structures. More recent work has explored richer forms of relational reason-ing and adaptive coordination. DMCG [34] models higher-order and indirect agent dependencies through deep meta coordination graphs, enabling coordination beyond pairwise interactions. HAMMER [35] incorporates hierarchical and multi-level relational abstractions to improve scalable coor-dination in complex multi-agent environments. TIGER [36] studies temporal and interaction-aware graph representations for capturing evolving coordination patterns over time, while AGP [37] introduces action-level graph priors that explicitly model dependencies between agent-action pairs to improve fine-grained coordination. Beyond coordination graphs, graph neural networks have been applied more broadly in MARL to model agent interactions [38, 39], encode relational inductive biases [40], and support scalable multi-agent communica-tion [41]. Graph attention networks [42] and graph trans-formers [12] have been explored in related settings for their ability to perform content-dependent aggregation over graph neighborhoods. The present work draws on this literature but departs from prior CG methods by replacing standard graph convolutions with graph transformer convolutions, enabling receiver-dependent, content-adaptive message passing that di-rectly addresses the information-integration requirements of action coordination. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. The Cooperative Multi-Agent Model 

We formalize the cooperative multi-agent setting as aDecentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) [2], defined by the tuple ⟨S , N , A, O, P, R, γ ⟩.Here S is the set of global environment states, N = {1, . . . , n }

is the finite set of agents, and A = A1 × · · · × A n is the joint action space, where Ai is the local action space of agent i. At each timestep t, the environment occupies a global state st ∈ S 

that is not directly accessible to any agent. Instead, each agent 

i receives a private local observation oti ∈ O drawn from an observation function that maps the global state to each agent’s partial view of the environment. Each agent selects an action 

ati ∈ A i, forming a joint action at = ( at

> 1

, . . . , a tn) ∈ A . The environment transitions according to P (st+1 | st, at), and all agents receive a shared team reward rt = R(st, at). Because each agent observes only oti rather than the global state, policies are conditioned on each agent’s action-observation history τ ti = ( o0 

> i

, a 0 

> i

, . . . , o ti), which summarizes all locally available information up to timestep t. The individual policy 

πi(ai | τi) maps this history to a distribution over local actions, and the joint policy π = ( π1, . . . , π n) induces a distribution over joint action profiles at each timestep. The team objective is to find a joint policy that maximizes the expected discounted return: 

J(π) = E

" TX

> t=0

γtrt

#

, (1) where γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. The central difficulty is that, although the reward depends on the joint action, each agent must select its action based solely on its own history, with no direct access to the observations, histories, or intended actions of its teammates. 

B. Value Decomposition under CTDE 

Within the CTDE paradigm [2, 25], value decomposition methods factorize the joint action-value function Qtot (τ , a, s )

into per-agent components to enable tractable decentralized action selection. QMIX [5] parameterizes Qtot as a monotonic combination of individual action-value functions Qi(τi, a i):

Qtot (τ , a, s ) = fmix (Q1(τ1, a 1), . . . , Q n(τn, a n); s) , (2) where fmix is a feedforward network whose non-negative weights are generated by hypernetworks conditioned on the global state s, enforcing the monotonicity constraint 

∂Q tot /∂Q i ≥ 0 for all i. This constraint guarantees that the joint greedy action arg max a Qtot decomposes into inde-pendent per-agent greedy actions arg max ai Qi, maintaining 4

consistency between centralized training and decentralized execution. The system is trained end-to-end by minimizing a TD loss with double Q-learning [43] against a periodically updated target network. In SACHI , QMIX serves as the value decomposition backbone, receiving per-agent Qi values com-puted from coordination-enriched representations constructed by the graph transformer layers described in the next section. 

C. From Graph Convolutions to Graph Transformers 

Graph neural networks (GNNs) provide a general mecha-nism for propagating information between agents by treating the agent set as nodes and inter-agent relationships as edges of a graph G = ( N , E). Each agent i is associated with a learned representation (embedding) h(ℓ) 

> i

∈ Rd at layer ℓ, initialized as h(0)  

> i

= ϕenc (τi) from its local action-observation history and iteratively refined through message passing. At each layer 

ℓ, a GNN updates each agent’s representation by aggregating messages from its neighbors: 

h(ℓ+1)  

> i

= ϕ

h(ℓ) 

> i

, M 

> j∈N (i)

ψ



h(ℓ) 

> i

, h(ℓ)

> j

 , (3) where ϕ and ψ are learnable functions, N (i) is the neighbor set of agent i, and L is a permutation-invariant aggregation operator. Standard graph convolutions [44] instantiate ψ as a fixed linear transformation applied uniformly to all neighbors, which treats every incoming message as equally informative regardless of the receiver’s current state. Graph attention networks [42] improve on this by computing a scalar attention weight αij for each neighbor, but the weight depends only on the sender’s features and does not adapt to the receiver’s query. Graph transformer convolutions [12] address both limitations by computing attention via scaled dot-product between a query derived from the receiver and a key derived from the sender: 

αij =exp 



(WQ hi)⊤(WK hj )/√d

P  

> k∈N (i)

exp 



(WQ hi)⊤(WK hk)/√d

 , (4) where WQ and WK are learnable query and key projections and d is the embedding dimension. This formulation makes the attention weight αij dependent on both the sender’s state and the receiver’s current needs, producing content-dependent, asymmetric message passing in which the same neighbor may contribute different information to different receivers. As we argue in the next section, this property directly addresses the three core sub-problems of action coordination: which agents should communicate, what information they should send, and how each receiver should integrate incoming signals given its own state. IV. M ETHOD : SACHI 

The preceding discussion identified coordination failure in cooperative teams as a failure of information integration: each agent holds a partial view of the world, and no mechanism exists to assemble those views into representations that sup-port jointly coherent action selection. SACHI addresses this directly. The central idea is to enrich each agent’s internal representation with coordination-relevant information from its teammates before action selection, so that standard per-agent Q-value maximization produces coordinated behavior without requiring explicit run-time communication. We accomplish this through a pipeline of four stages: input construction, observation encoding, graph transformer message passing over an inter-agent coordination graph, and per-agent action-value estimation with centralized value mixing, described below and summarized in Algorithm 1. 

a) Input construction: At each timestep t, agent i receives a local observation oti from the environment. We augment this with a one-hot agent identifier ei ∈ { 0, 1}n and form the input: 

xti = oti ∥ ei

 ∈ Rdin , (5) where ∥ denotes concatenation. The identity vector enables the shared network to learn agent-specific behavior or a form of implicit role specialization, while retaining full parameter sharing across the team. 

b) From observations to embeddings: Each agent’s input is mapped to a latent embedding through a shared encoder 

ϕenc , implemented as a two-layer MLP with hidden dimension 

dh = 128 :

h(0)  

> i

= ϕenc (xti) ∈ Rd, (6) where d = din so that the embedding dimension is commen-surate with the input space. At this stage, each embedding reflects only agent i’s local information; the next stage is designed to break this isolation. subsequent 

c) Graph topology and soft-attention modulation: We define a coordination graph G = ( N , E) over the agent set, represented as a dense adjacency matrix A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n. We use a fully connected graph A = 11 ⊤, so that every agent pair has the opportunity to exchange information. Rather than engineering or learning the topology explicitly, we apply a soft-attention modulation layer to the encoded embeddings, producing a dense attention matrix G ∈ Rn×n that reweights the coordination graph: 

G = softmax 



ϕatt (H(0) ) ( H(0) )⊤

, (7) where H(0) ∈ Rn×d is the matrix of stacked initial embed-dings and ϕatt is a learned linear projection. The effective adja-cency used for message passing is then ˜A = A ⊙ G, where ⊙

denotes element-wise multiplication. This mechanism allows  

> SACHI

to dynamically suppress irrelevant edges and amplify informative ones before graph transformer message passing begins. This form of attention-based graph reweighting, com-monly used in prior graph-based MARL [31, 45, 39], provides a coarse, global estimate of agent relevance by modulating which interactions are emphasized. In SACHI , this serves as an initial filtering stage, after which the subsequent graph transformer layers perform fine-grained, receiver-dependent, content-conditioned message passing. 

d) Graph transformer message passing: The core of  

> SACHI

is a stack of L graph transformer convolution lay-ers [12] that iteratively refine agent embeddings by passing 5

Fig. 2: Overview of SACHI . Local observations are encoded into agent embeddings, refined through soft-attention-modulated graph transformer message passing, and mapped to per-agent Q-values. The model performs receiver-dependent information integration prior to action selection, allowing coordinated behavior to emerge under decentralized execution. messages along the edges of ˜A. At layer ℓ, the embedding of agent i is updated as: 

h(ℓ+1)  

> i

= tanh 

W(ℓ)1 h(ℓ) 

> i

+ X 

> j∈N (i)

α(ℓ) 

> ij

W(ℓ)2 h(ℓ) 

> j

+ b(ℓ)

 ,

(8) where W(ℓ)1 , W(ℓ)2 ∈ Rd×d are learnable projection matrices, 

b(ℓ) is a bias, and N (i) denotes the neighbors of agent i

in ˜A. The first term transforms agent i’s own embedding; the second aggregates incoming messages from neighbors, each weighted by an attention coefficient α(ℓ) 

> ij

computed via scaled dot-product attention between a query derived from the receiver and a key derived from the sender: 

α(ℓ) 

> ij

=exp 

 W(ℓ)3 h(ℓ)

> i

⊤ W(ℓ)4 h(ℓ)

> j

 / √d

P  

> k∈N (i)

exp 

 W(ℓ)3 h(ℓ)

> i

⊤ W(ℓ)4 h(ℓ)

> k

 / √d

 , (9) where W(ℓ)3 and W(ℓ)4 are learnable query and key projections. This formulation connects directly to the three sub-problems of coordination identified in the introduction. The graph ˜A

determines which agents can exchange information and mod-ulates the strength of their interactions. The key projection W4

controls what each sender makes visible. The query projection 

W3 controls how each receiver filters incoming signals in light of its own current state. Because α(ℓ) 

> ij

depends on both h(ℓ) 

> i

and 

h(ℓ) 

> j

, the same neighbor may contribute different information to different receivers, and to the same receiver at different timesteps; the messages are content-dependent, asymmetric, and learned end-to-end. The L layers are applied sequentially, so after L steps each agent’s representation has been informed by agents up to L hops away, enabling indirect coordination through intermediate agents. We use L = 2 in all experiments. 

e) Preserving local information via residual connection: 

A risk of iterative message passing is that locally observed information may be diluted or overwritten by coordination signals. To prevent this, we add a residual connection from initial embeddings to output of the final graph transformer layer: 

˜hi = h(0)  

> i

+ h(L) 

> i

. (10) This ensures that ˜hi retains agent i’s full local information, with the graph transformer layers contributing an additive coordination refinement. The design reflects a deliberate prin-ciple: coordination should complement local knowledge, not replace it. 

f) From enriched representations to action values: The coordination-enriched embeddings ˜hi are passed through a 6

shared aggregation network ϕagg (a two-layer MLP with the same architecture as ϕenc ), producing final per-agent repre-sentations zi = ϕagg (˜hi) ∈ Rd. These are processed by a shared agent network ψ (a three-layer feedforward network with hidden dimension da = 64 ) that outputs individual action values: 

Qi(τi, · ) = ψ(zi) ∈ R|A i|. (11) At execution time, each agent independently selects ai =arg max a Qi(τi, a ). So, as in prior coordination graph meth-ods (e.g., [29, 30, 31, 33, 46, 47]), no explicit inter-agent communication protocol is required at execution time; coor-dination is realized implicitly within the shared model during the forward pass. 

g) Centralized training with value mixing: For central-ized training, the individual Q-values are combined via a QMIX mixing network [5] to produce the joint value estimate: 

Qtot (τ , a, s ) = fmix (Q1(τ1, a 1), . . . , Q n(τn, a n); s) , (12) where fmix is a feedforward network whose non-negative weights are generated by hypernetworks conditioned on the global state s. The monotonicity constraint ∂Q tot /∂Q i ≥ 0

ensures that the joint greedy action decomposes into per-agent greedy actions, maintaining consistency between centralized training and decentralized execution. The entire architecture, including the encoder, attention module, graph transformer layers, aggregator, agent network, and mixer, is trained end-to-end by minimizing the TD loss with double Q-learning [43]: 

L(θ) = EB



r + γ Q −

> tot

 τ ′, a∗, s ′ − Qtot (τ , a, s )

2

, (13) where B is a replay buffer of collected episodes, Q−

> tot

is a periodically-updated target network, and a∗ =arg max a′ Qtot (τ ′, a′, s ′) is selected by the online network. Rewards are standardized using a running mean and variance estimate to stabilize training. Exploration follows ϵ-greedy action selection with linear ϵ-annealing. 

h) Design rationale: The architecture of SACHI makes three deliberate design choices that together address the information-integration bottleneck. First, the soft-attention modulation layer provides a global, input-dependent reweight-ing of the coordination graph before message passing begins, allowing the model to suppress structurally irrelevant agent pairs at low computational cost. Second, and more criti-cally, the graph transformer layers provide content-dependent, receiver-sensitive message passing: because α(ℓ) 

> ij

depends on both the sender’s and receiver’s current embeddings, each agent selectively accumulates precisely the coordination-relevant signals it needs from its neighbors, rather than ag-gregating all available information indiscriminately. This is the sense in which the information integration is holistic ,i.e., not a collection of everything, but an intelligent, state-conditioned distillation of what matters. Third, the residual connection ensures that this coordination signal is additive rather than substitutive, preserving the integrity of each agent’s local observation throughout the enrichment process. 

Algorithm 1 The SACHI Algorithm 

Require: Observations {oti}ni=1 , global state st, agent identi-fiers {ei}, replay buffer B, coordination graph A

Ensure: Per-agent actions {ai}; updated parameters θ

— Forward Pass All Agents —  

> 1:

for each agent i ∈ N do  

> 2:

xi ← [oti ∥ ei] ▷ Augment observation with agent ID  

> 3:

h(0)  

> i

← ϕenc (xi) ▷ Shared MLP encoder  

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

G ← softmax  ϕatt (H(0) ) ( H(0) )⊤ ▷ Soft-attention graph modulation  

> 6:

˜A ← A ⊙ G ▷ Modulated adjacency  

> 7:

for ℓ = 0 , . . . , L − 1 do  

> 8:

for each agent i ∈ N do  

> 9:

Compute α(ℓ) 

> ij

via Eq. (9) for all j ∈ N (i) 

> 10:

h(ℓ+1)  

> i

← Eq. (8) ▷ Graph transformer update  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

for each agent i ∈ N do  

> 14:

˜hi ← h(0)  

> i

+ h(L) 

> i

▷ Residual connection  

> 15:

zi ← ϕagg (˜hi) ▷ Shared aggregator  

> 16:

Qi(τi, ·) ← ψ(zi) ▷ Per-agent action values  

> 17:

ai ← arg max a Qi(τi, a ) ▷ Decentralized action selection  

> 18:

end for — Training Step —  

> 19:

Sample minibatch (τ , a, r, τ ′, s, s ′) ∼ B  

> 20:

Qtot ← fmix (Q1, . . . , Q n; s) ▷ QMIX value mixing  

> 21:

a∗ ← arg max a′ Qtot (τ ′, a′, s ′) 

> 22:

Compute L(θ) via Eq. (13) and update θ ▷ TD loss, double Q-learning  

> 23:

Periodically update target network Q− 

> tot

← Qtot 

V. E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

We evaluate SACHI on a suite of five cooperative multi-agent tasks to collectively probe the full spectrum of coordination demands that arise in cooperative MARL: spatial symmetry-breaking, communicative grounding, role-asymmetric signal-ing, private protocol learning under adversarial pressure, and adversarially contested spatial coverage. Together, these en-vironments stress-test the three core sub-problems of action coordination that SACHI is designed to address: which agents must exchange information, what information they should transmit, and how each receiver should integrate incoming signals given its own state, while varying the structure of the coordination bottleneck across tasks. We describe each environment, justify its inclusion, detail the baselines against which SACHI is evaluated, and specify the experimental pro-tocol used to ensure fair and reproducible comparisons. 

A. Environments a) REFERENCE [6]: is a cooperative navigation task in which two agents must each reach a distinct target landmark, but neither observes its own target. Instead, each agent ob-serves its partner’s goal and must communicate this through 7

a1 a2 

> goal (a1)goal (a2)distractor observes goal (a1)
> observes goal (a2)
> signal signal

Fig. 3: R EFERENCE : a1 observes a2’s goal (orange dashed) and vice versa (teal dashed). Each agent signals this (purple) so its partner can navigate to the correct landmark (solid arrows). its actions. Success requires learning a shared protocol in which each agent acts as both an informative sender and a faithful receiver. The task directly tests content-dependent coordination, as agents must extract and transmit task-relevant information between complementary observations (Figure 3).         

> Alice channel Bob
> Eve
> ϕ(m)ˆm
> intercept r+if Bob correct
> r+if Eve correct
> ˆm=m?

## ⊘

> private code

Fig. 4: C RYPTO : Alice encodes m as ϕ(m) over a shared channel. Bob must reconstruct m; Eve must not. 

b) CRYPTO [6]: casts coordination as a communication problem under adversarial pressure. Alice encodes a message for Bob over a shared channel, while an adversary (Eve) attempts to decode it. The cooperative pair is rewarded when Bob succeeds and Eve fails. This requires learning signals that are informative to teammates but uninformative to adversaries, testing selective information encoding and filtering (Figure 4).   

> Speaker
> cannot move
> L
> ⋆
> sees ⋆
> “ sym ”
> ??

Fig. 5: S PEAKER LISTENER : speaker observes target ( ⋆) and broadcasts a discrete symbol (orange); listener interprets the symbol and navigates (teal), unable to see the target directly. 

c) SPEAKER LISTENER [6]: introduces fixed role asym-metry. The speaker observes the target but cannot move, while the listener can move but cannot observe the target. The speaker must broadcast a discrete signal encoding the target, which the listener interprets to navigate correctly. Unlike REFERENCE , the communication structure is asymmetric and fixed, testing whether coordination mechanisms can specialize to structured information flow (Figure 5). 

d) ADVERSARY [6]: is a mixed cooperative-competitive task in which a team of agents must reach a hidden target   

> target
> c1
> c2
> c3
> e
> ?
> decoy decoy
> decoy
> ci: cooperative e: adversary

Fig. 6: A DVERSARY : cooperative agents ( ci, blue) distribute across all landmarks to conceal true target (teal) from adver-sary ( e, red), who must infer target from team’s configuration. while preventing a faster adversary from identifying it. The cooperative agents are rewarded for occupying the target, while the adversary is rewarded for reaching it. Effective strategies require distributing across landmarks to conceal the target, forcing agents to coordinate both coverage and deception under an active opponent (Figure 6).             

> ABC
> ××
> Coverage: 1/6 r≈0
> ABC
> DEF
> Coverage: 6/6 r= 1

Fig. 7: D ISPERSE : Agents must try to achieve full coverage. 

e) DISPERSE [33]: requires n agents to occupy n iden-tical resource zones with exactly one agent per zone. Rewards depend on conflict-free coverage, but all zones are locally indistinguishable, making symmetry-breaking the central chal-lenge. Greedy local policies lead to clustering and under-coverage. Solving the task requires agents to incorporate teammates’ implicit intentions into their representations to achieve globally consistent assignments (Figure 7). These environments span complementary coordination regimes. Reference and Speaker Listener evaluate learned communication under symmetric and asymmetric roles. Crypto adds adversarial pressure to communication, requiring selec-tive information sharing. Adversary tests spatial coordination under competition, while Disperse isolates symmetry-breaking in purely cooperative settings. Together, they provide a bal-anced evaluation of SACHI ’s ability to integrate information across agents under diverse coordination structures. 

B. Baselines 

We compare SACHI against twelve baselines spanning a spectrum from no coordination to explicit graph-based repre-sentation learning. This ensures that performance differences reflect SACHI ’s architectural contribution rather than generic coordination effects. 

a) No coordination: IQL [15] and IPPO [7] treat each agent independently, conditioning only on local observations. These methods provide lower bounds, quantifying perfor-mance in the absence of coordination. 8

b) Implicit coordination: These methods induce coordi-nation through the training objective without explicit inter-agent communication. VDN [4] decomposes the joint value as a sum of per-agent utilities, while QMIX [5] generalizes this to a monotonic nonlinear mixing conditioned on global state. 

QTRAN [26], QPLEX [27] further relax these structural con-straints to represent broader classes of joint value functions, at the cost of additional complexity. MAPPO [7] uses a central-ized critic during training but executes decentralized policies. This group represents the dominant paradigm in cooperative MARL and forms the primary category for evaluating SACHI .

c) Explicit joint behavior modeling: FOP [48] models the joint policy distribution directly under a maximum-entropy objective, capturing coordination at the level of joint actions. It provides a comparison point for explicit joint reasoning beyond additive or monotonic structures. 

d) Coordination graphs: DCG [30] models pairwise dependencies via a fully connected coordination graph with learned edge payoffs, optimized through message passing. 

CASEC [33] extends this by learning sparse, context-dependent coordination structures. Both encode coordination in the value function via pairwise interactions, contrasting with 

> SACHI

’s representation-level approach. 

e) Graph representation learning: These methods are closest to SACHI . DGN [38] uses graph convolution with uniform aggregation, treating all neighbors equally. DICG [31] learns a dynamic interaction graph but employs sender-only attention, where message importance depends only on the sender. Comparing against this group isolates the effect of 

> SACHI

’s core components. Each group provides a distinct counterfactual. Groups I–II establish the gap between independent learning and implicit coordination. Group III tests explicit joint policy modeling. Group IV evaluates pairwise coordination in the value func-tion. Group V provides the closest architectural comparison, isolating whether receiver-dependent attention improves over uniform aggregation (DGN) and sender-only attention with dynamic topology (DICG). Together, these baselines span key dimensions of cooperative MARL: learning paradigm, coordi-nation mechanism, and graph structure, ensuring a controlled and comprehensive evaluation of SACHI .

C. Evaluation Protocol 

All algorithms are trained for up to 2 × 10 6 environment steps across all tasks. All implementations share a common training pipeline, including identical replay buffer capacity, minibatch size, target network update frequency, optimizer (Adam), and learning rate schedule, to ensure that observed performance differences are attributable to algorithmic design rather than implementation variance. For Q-learning methods, exploration follows ϵ-greedy action selection with ϵ annealed linearly from 1.0 to 0.05 over the first 50 ,000 timesteps; for policy-gradient methods, entropy regularization is used with schedules matched across comparable algorithms. Rewards are standardized online using a running mean and variance estimate for all methods to stabilize training across environ-ments with different reward scales. Performance is reported TABLE I: Final performance (mean ± stderr over seeds, last 2% of training). Best per environment in bold.                                                                                                                                                                                                         

> Method Reference Crypto Speaker-Listener Adversary Disperse
> SACHI -25.39 ±0.35 48.00 ±0.00 -17.22 ±0.72 85.04 ±2.40 -0.37 ±0.01 QMIX -28.81 ±0.39 -14.34 ±8.83 -18.45 ±0.22 10.45 ±2.01 -2.57 ±0.02 VDN -38.44 ±0.39 47.70 ±0.18 -25.68 ±1.73 18.69 ±1.85 -2.59 ±0.01 IQL -36.12 ±0.33 42.38 ±1.70 -27.70 ±0.71 33.46 ±0.78 -2.36 ±0.01 MAPPO -34.57 ±0.07 7.31 ±5.98 -19.44 ±1.30 31.83 ±1.61 -2.54 ±0.01 IPPO -34.69 ±0.09 7.99 ±5.89 -20.38 ±1.24 23.54 ±1.07 -2.78 ±0.03 FOP -35.38 ±0.35 23.69 ±9.29 -48.15 ±12.43 44.68 ±0.30 -1.12 ±0.02 DICG -34.97 ±0.10 13.35 ±8.70 -22.45 ±1.56 36.51 ±0.68 -0.36 ±0.01
> DGN -41.95 ±4.08 48.00 ±0.00 -17.82 ±0.65 83.54 ±0.32 -0.39 ±0.01 DCG -27.34 ±0.41 50.00 ±0.00 -21.19 ±0.48 40.35 ±1.59 -1.16 ±0.02 CASEC -50.71 ±3.54 43.90 ±2.07 -43.79 ±3.67 81.55 ±4.03 -2.00 ±0.09 QTRAN -39.33 ±1.39 46.07 ±0.13 -34.29 ±0.62 79.79 ±2.36 -4.55 ±0.02 QPLEX -65.72 ±12.42 8.98 ±9.53 -29.49 ±1.78 65.69 ±8.15 -2.99 ±0.07

as mean episodic reward over five independent trials, with standard deviation shown as a shaded region surrounding the learning curve throughout training. We evaluate two com-plementary metrics: final performance, defined as the mean reward averaged over the last 10% of training steps, which measures the quality of the converged policy; and sample efficiency, measured as the normalized area under the learning curve, which captures how rapidly each method approaches its asymptotic performance. Hyperparameters for all baselines follow their original implementations, including any reported environment-specific tuning. SACHI uses L = 2 , d = 64 , and single-head attention ( K = 1 ). All methods are run under a unified experimental setup [49, 50, 51] to ensure consistent and comparable evaluation. VI. R ESULTS 

We organize the empirical evaluation around a progres-sion of increasingly stringent questions. We begin with the most basic question: “does SACHI learn good policies?”, and proceed to questions of statistical robustness, efficiency, and architectural necessity. 

A. Per-Environment Performance 

Figure 8 and Table I present a full picture, by making it easy to compare final performance and identify per-environment wins (Table I), alongside the learning curves, which reveal training dynamics such as stability, convergence speed, and variability across episodes (Figure 8). We highlight three qualitative patterns that emerge from the data. 

a) Pattern 1: SACHI dominates where coordination is hardest: The most striking separations occur on tasks with tight, asymmetric interdependence. On A DVERSARY , SACHI 

reaches 85 .0 ± 2.4, more than doubling the returns of QMIX ( 10 .5), VDN ( 18 .7), and IPPO ( 23 .5). These value-decomposition and policy-gradient methods have no mecha-nism for one agent to condition its representation on another’s state; on a task where the cooperative team must collectively outmaneuver a pretrained adversary, this limitation is fatal.  

> SACHI

and DGN ( 83 .5) are the only methods that break 

80 , and both use graph-structured inter-agent information exchange. However, SACHI does so with 5× fewer parameters (Section VI-C). QTRAN (79 .8) and QPLEX (65 .7) both fall short despite employing richer value factorizations than 9

Fig. 8: Learning curves across five cooperative environments (mean ± standard error over five seeds). SACHI (red, bold) matches or exceeds the best baseline on every environment by convergence. QMIX, suggesting that more expressive decompositions of the joint value function alone are insufficient without explicit inter-agent information exchange. On R EFERENCE , where each agent observes only the other’s target and must infer its own,  

> SACHI

converges to −25 .4 ± 0.4, ahead of DCG ( −27 .3) and well above the baseline cluster near −35 . QPLEX collapses to −65 .7 ± 12 .4 on this task (the worst among all methods) with high variance across seeds. This task is a direct test of the information-integration thesis: an agent literally cannot act well without extracting a specific piece of information from its partner’s representation. The graph transformer’s query-key mechanism is precisely suited to this extraction. 

b) Pattern 2: SACHI matches specialists on saturated tasks: Not every environment has room to differentiate. On CRYPTO , DCG reaches the ceiling score of 50 .0, with SACHI 

and DGN close behind at 48 .0 and QTRAN at 46 .1. On DISPERSE , DICG ( −0.36 ) and SACHI (−0.37 ) are separated by a margin smaller than either method’s standard error, while QTRAN ( −4.55 ) and QPLEX ( −2.99 ) fall well behind, indicating that the coordination structure of this task is not well captured by value-factorization alone. When a task is solvable by a simpler coordination mechanism, SACHI does not underperform. It converges to the same region. This is the expected behavior of a strictly more expressive message-passing primitive: it should never do worse than its less expressive counterparts (given sufficient data), and it should do better when the task demands it. 

c) Pattern 3: Methods that match or beat SACHI on individual tasks are not uniformly strongest overall: DCG tops CRYPTO but achieves only 40 .4 on A DVERSARY , less than half of SACHI ’s score. DICG edges ahead on D ISPERSE but drops to 13 .4 on C RYPTO . DGN is the strongest overall base-line and remains competitive with SACHI on several tasks, but its advantage is narrower and less consistent in the aggregate analyses (see Section VI-B). QTRAN performs reasonably on A DVERSARY (79 .8) and C RYPTO (46 .1) but collapses on DISPERSE (−4.55 ), the worst score of any method on that task. QPLEX shows extreme inconsistency: competitive on ADVERSARY (65 .7) but the worst performer on R EFERENCE 

(−65 .7) with standard errors exceeding 12 points. The prac-tical question is therefore not which method wins a single environment, but which one remains most reliable across tasks. The aggregate results below address this directly. 

B. Aggregate Statistical Analysis 

Per-environment comparisons are informative but fragile: a method that excels on one task and fails on another can look good or bad depending on which table entry one highlights. Following the recommendations of [52], we compute four aggregate metrics over min-max normalized scores with 95% 

bootstrap confidence intervals. For each method m, environ-ment e, and seed s, let vm,e,s be the mean return over the last 

5% of training. We normalize: 

ˆvm,e,s = vm,e,s − vmin 

> e

vmax  

> e

− vmin 

> e

(14) 

vmin  

> e

= min 

> m′∈M base

¯vm′,e , vmax  

> e

= max 

> m′∈M base

¯vm′,e (15) where ¯vm′,e = S−1 P 

> s

vm′,e,s and Mbase excludes SACHI ,so that scores can exceed 1.0.Figure 9 reports four metrics computed over the pooled set of normalized scores {ˆvm,e,s } for each method m. The Mean and Median have their usual definitions. The Interquartile Mean (IQM) averages only the middle 50% of the score distri-bution, i.e., it discards the best and worst quartiles, making it robust to both lucky outliers and catastrophic seeds. The Opti-mality Gap (OG), defined as OG (m) = E[max(0 , 1−ˆvm,e,s )] ,10 

Fig. 9: Aggregate normalized scores with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. SACHI leads on all four metrics; its CI does not overlap with any baseline on Mean, IQM, or OG. measures by how much, on average, a method falls short of the best-baseline ceiling ( ˆv = 1 ); a method that always matches or exceeds the best baseline has OG = 0 . For each metric, we construct 95% confidence intervals by bootstrap resampling the (environment × seed) score pool 2,000 times and taking the 2.5th and 97 .5th percentiles, requiring no parametric distributional assumptions. Three observations stand out:  

> •

Consistently at the ceiling. SACHI achieves an IQM of 

1.00 with a 95% confidence interval (CI) of [0 .98 , 1.03] .Recall that a normalized score of 1.0 corresponds to the best baseline’s average performance on a given environ-ment. An IQM of 1.00 means that even after discarding the top and bottom 25% of SACHI ’s runs, the remaining “typical” runs match or exceed the best baseline. No other method comes close: next-highest IQM is DGN at ≈0.75 . 

> •

Near-zero shortfall. SACHI ’s optimality gap is 0.01 (CI: 

[0 .01 , 0.02] ). To put this in perspective: an OG of 0.01 

means that, on average, SACHI falls only 1% below the best-baseline ceiling across all environments and seeds. In practical terms, SACHI almost never underperforms the strongest available alternative on any given task.  

> •

Statistically significant. SACHI ’s 95% bootstrap CIs do not overlap with those of any baseline on Mean, IQM, or OG. This means the advantage is not an artifact of favorable seed draws or a single dominant environment. 

Friedman-style Average Ranks [53]: To guard against the possibility that SACHI ’s aggregate score is inflated by one dominant environment, we compute Friedman-style av-erage ranks (Figure 10). For each environment, methods are ranked 1 (best) to 11 (worst) by mean final return; ranks are then averaged. SACHI achieves 1.90 , first or second on every environment. DCG ( 3.60 ) and DGN ( 3.90 ) are the nearest competitors, roughly two full ranks behind. The gap to the value-decomposition family (QMIX: 7.20 ; VDN: 8.20 ;QTRAN: 8.60 ; QPLEX: 10 .20 ) is even larger, spanning more than five ranks. This confirms that SACHI ’s advantage is not an artifact of a single strong showing. 

The Performance Profile : Figure 11 provides the final 

Fig. 10: Average rank across five environments (lower is better). SACHI ranks first or second on every task. statistical lens. For each threshold τ , it plots Pr(ˆ vm,e,s ≥ τ ),i.e., the fraction of (environment × seed) runs achieving at least score τ . A curve that lies everywhere above another indicates stochastic dominance: the higher method is at least as good on every quantile of the run distribution. SACHI ’s curve dominates all ten baselines at every threshold. At τ = 1 .0 (the best-baseline ceiling) over 80% of SACHI ’s runs still exceed this score. DGN, the strongest competitor, drops to ≈40% ;all other methods fall below 20% . Stochastic dominance is a strong property: it implies that SACHI is preferred under any monotone utility function over normalized scores, not just the specific metrics we report. 

C. Sample Efficiency 

Good final performance means little if it comes at pro-hibitive cost. We examine efficiency along three axes: sample efficiency over the full trajectory, early-training behavior, and parameter count. 11 

Fig. 11: Performance profile. SACHI stochastically dominates every baseline at every threshold τ .

a) Learning-trajectory efficiency: Let Rm,e,s (t) denote the test return of method m on environment e with seed s at training timestep t, and let T denote the total training budget. We compute the normalized area under the learning curve: AUC m,e,s = 1

T

Z T

> 0

Rm,e,s (t) dt, (16) estimated via the trapezoidal rule and min-max normalized per environment. Figure 12 shows that SACHI ranks first. Because AUC integrates performance across the entire training trajectory this result confirms that SACHI ’s advantage is not an artifact of late-stage convergence but reflects a consistently stronger learning signal throughout training. 

Fig. 12: Normalized area under the learning curve (higher is better). SACHI achieves the highest overall learning efficiency. 

b) Jump-start performance: AUC captures the full train-ing trajectory, but it does not reveal how quickly a method begins to coordinate. To isolate early-training behavior, we define the jump-start value of method m on environment e as the mean test return over the early-training window: 

J(m, e ) = 1

S

> S

X

> s=1

1

|T s|

X

> t∈T s

ys(t), (17) where Ts = { t ∈ xs : 20 K ≤ t ≤ 100 K}, ys(t) is the test return of seed s at step t. The lower bound of 20 K excludes the random-initialization phase, where return magnitude reflects network expressiveness rather than coordination ability. To compare across environments with different reward scales, we normalize each J(m, e ) against baseline-only anchors: score (m, e ) = J(m, e ) − bmin (e)

bmax (e) − bmin (e) × 100 , (18) 

bmin (e) = min  

> m′∈B

J(m′, e ), bmax (e) = max  

> m′∈B

J(m′, e ), (19) where B excludes SACHI . A score of 0% means the method 

Fig. 13: Jump-start performance over the first 100 K steps (percentage of best baseline’s final score). SACHI ranks first. matches the worst baseline’s early performance; 100% means it matches the best. The aggregate score is the mean of score (m, e ) across environments. Figure 13 shows that SACHI 

scores 98 .9% , which is virtually indistinguishable from the best baseline’s early performance on every environment. DGN (98 .6% ) is the only method comparably close, while the remaining field drops off to CASEC ( 90 .4% ), VDN ( 72 .3% ), and QMIX ( 41 .8% ). This implies that SACHI ’s coordination module does not impose an early-training penalty: it begins producing useful inter-agent signals almost immediately, plac-ing SACHI among the fastest-coordinating methods from the start of training, not only at convergence. 

c) Parameter efficiency: Figure 14 decomposes each method’s trainable parameter count into two components: (i) shared infrastructure (agent network + mixer) and (ii) the coordination module. For SACHI , the latter includes the en-coder, graph transformer layers, and aggregation network, con-tributing ∼12 K parameters for a total of 31 K. Although SACHI 

uses the same QMIX-style mixer, it is still smaller than QMIX (40 K). The key difference lies in the agent network. QMIX and related value-decomposition methods rely on relatively heavy per-agent networks (e.g., GRUs, ∼27 K parameters) to implicitly capture coordination effects and temporal dynamics within each agent’s representation. In contrast, SACHI makes coordination explicit via the graph transformer, allowing the per-agent network to be simplified to a lightweight feedfor-ward model ( ∼4K). This architectural shift moves complexity from implicit, per-agent modeling to a shared coordination module, resulting in a lower overall parameter count. As a result, SACHI remains smaller than QMIX ( 40 K), QTRAN 12 

Fig. 14: Parameter breakdown per method. Blue: agent + mixer. Red: coordination module. SACHI has fewer total pa-rameters than most baselines. (41 K), or MAPPO ( 106 K), despite introducing an explicit coordination mechanism. QPLEX ( 231 K) is the largest method in the comparison, more than 7× the size of SACHI , yet ranks last on both AUC and average rank. DGN, the strongest baseline on several tasks, requires 150 K parameters. This is nearly 5× more than SACHI , yet is consistently outperformed on the aggregate metrics. 

D. Ablation Studies 

The results above establish that SACHI works. The ablations establish why it works. We vary three axes on R EFERENCE 

(the environment with the widest dynamic range across archi-tectural variants) and report learning curves in Figure 15. 

a) Message-passing architecture (Panel a): We replace Transformer with parameter-matched (PM) GAT, GCN, and MLP alternatives. The result is a clean monotone ordering: Transformer ( ≈− 26 ) > GAT ( ≈− 30 ) > GCN ( ≈− 35 ) > MLP (≈− 40 ). This ordering is not accidental. It tracks exactly the degree of content-dependent message filtering each operator provides. The Transformer computes attention as a function of both sender and receiver states (Equation 9); GAT conditions on the sender but uses a shared receiver-independent scoring function; GCN applies a uniform transformation to all neigh-bors; and MLP ignores graph structure entirely. Moreover, parameter-matching ensures that these differences reflect in-ductive bias, i.e., how it processes inter-agent information, and not how many parameters it has. This is the central empirical result of the paper: it is not more parameters, more layers, or a fancier training procedure that drives SACHI ’s advantage; it is content-dependent message passing. 

b) Attention heads (Panel b): K=2 and K=3 yield stable convergence near −26 , while K=1 and K=4 exhibit seed-dependent instability with standard-error bands spanning ∼20 

points. The failure mode at K=4 is instructive: with four heads operating on (din /4) -dimensional subspaces, each head has a narrow view of the embedding, and the coordination signal becomes fragmented across heads that individually lack the TABLE II: Test return (mean ± stderr over 5 seeds) at training milestones on REFERENCE . Best per column in bold.                                                                                                                                                                 

> Method 2M 5M 8M 10M
> SACHI -25.39 ±0.35 -23.94 ±0.37 -22.63 ±0.10 -22.17 ±0.25
> QMIX -28.81 ±0.39 -26.29 ±0.92 -24.57 ±0.73 -23.84 ±0.58 VDN -38.44 ±0.39 -35.70 ±0.26 -36.18 ±0.14 -36.41 ±0.26 IQL -36.12 ±0.33 -35.01 ±0.50 -35.53 ±0.14 -36.07 ±0.29 MAPPO -34.57 ±0.07 -33.59 ±0.20 -34.38 ±0.28 -35.76 ±0.15 IPPO -34.69 ±0.09 -33.76 ±0.20 -34.10 ±0.10 -35.38 ±0.09 FOP -35.38 ±0.35 -30.85 ±2.35 -28.75 ±2.89 -24.55 ±1.36 DICG -34.97 ±0.10 -24.05 ±0.19 -23.37 ±0.41 -22.92 ±0.31 DGN -41.95 ±4.08 -44.20 ±7.24 -43.10 ±7.19 -47.70 ±10.24 DCG -27.34 ±0.41 -23.33 ±0.13 -22.68 ±0.17 -22.50 ±0.20 CASEC -50.71 ±3.54 -58.76 ±3.51 -61.98 ±4.18 -60.69 ±4.24 QTRAN -39.33 ±1.39 -39.29 ±0.61 -39.52 ±0.35 -39.69 ±0.55 QPLEX -65.72 ±12.42 -52.49 ±6.36 -64.28 ±9.53 -60.65 ±7.09

capacity to capture the full inter-agent relationship. At K=1 ,a single head must represent all aspects of the coordination signal in one set of query-key projections, which succeeds on some seeds but not others. K=2 provides the minimum redundancy needed for robustness. 

c) Layer depth (Panel c): L=1 and L=2 converge to similar final returns on R EFERENCE , where the coordination graph has diameter one and multi-hop propagation is unneces-sary. L=3 degrades to ≈− 40 , consistent with oversmoothing: repeated neighborhood aggregation drives all agent represen-tations toward a shared mean, destroying the individual infor-mation needed for decentralized action selection. For the team sizes in our evaluation ( n ≤ 12 ), L=2 provides a consistent trade-off: it covers each agent’s 2-hop neighborhood while remaining shallow enough to avoid representation collapse. This is consistent with findings in the broader GNN litera-ture [54, 55, 56, 44], where 2–3 layers are typically sufficient even in graphs with thousands of nodes, and deeper stacks yield diminishing or negative returns due to oversmoothing. 

d) Extended training (Table II): We also extend training from 2M to 10 M steps on R EFERENCE to examine whether the performance gap observed at 2M reflects a lasting advantage of SACHI or simply slower learning in competing methods. As training progresses, two patterns become clear. SACHI 

improves consistently and retains the best performance at later checkpoints, indicating a strong asymptotic solution. At the same time, a subset of baselines, notably DICG and DCG, con-tinue to improve with more samples and gradually narrow the gap. By convergence, the difference becomes small, suggesting that these methods can eventually reach similar performance levels given sufficient training. However, this convergence be-havior highlights a more important distinction: learning speed.  

> SACHI

attains high-quality solutions significantly earlier, while competing approaches require substantially more environment interactions to approach the same regime. In contrast, several other methods plateau or deteriorate with extended training, indicating that their limitations are not due to insufficient samples but to inherent representational constraints. 

In summary, across several cooperative environments, baselines, and statistical lenses, SACHI emerges as the most consistently competitive method: average rank 1.90 , IQM at the baseline ceiling ( 1.00 with non-overlapping CIs), near-zero optimality gap ( 0.01 ), and stochastic dominance over every 13 

Fig. 15: Ablation learning curves on R EFERENCE . (a) Encoder architecture (parameter-matched). (b) Number of attention heads. (c) Layer depth. The default configuration is shown in red. baseline at every performance threshold. It achieves this with fewer parameters ( 31 K) than most baselines, the highest jump-start performance ( 138% ), and the highest learning-trajectory AUC ( 1.01 ). The ablations trace the source of this advantage to a single design choice: the parameter-matched ordering Transformer > GAT > GCN > MLP shows that what drives 

> SACHI

’s performance is not model capacity but the degree of content-dependence in the message-passing operator, i.e., the ability of each agent to condition the information it extracts from a neighbor on both the neighbor’s state and its own. VII. D ISCUSSION 

Section VI established what SACHI achieves; this section examines why it works, what it costs, and where it applies. 

a) Why does SACHI work?: The consistent outperfor-mance of SACHI across diverse coordination challenges, from resource allocation (Disperse) to adversarial cooperation (Ad-versary) to directed communication (Speaker-Listener), points to three complementary explanations. First, the receiver-dependent attention mechanism (Eq 9) provides each agent with a personalized view of its neighbors’ states, filtered by its own current context. Ablations show a clear hierarchy (Transformer > GAT > GCN > MLP) aligned with this ca-pability. Second, the fully connected coordination graph with learned attention enables implicit structure learning: instead of fixing or explicitly pruning edges, the model learns which interactions matter, adapting to dynamic coordination patterns. Third, the statistical evidence confirms that these architectural choices compound into a reliable advantage. The combination of aggregate dominance, per-environment consistency, and parameter efficiency rules out the most common alternative explanations: the gains are not driven by a single favorable task, by lucky trials, or by increased model capacity. 

b) Computational Complexity: The primary computa-tional overhead of SACHI relative to non-graph baselines arises from the graph transformer message-passing stage. For n

agents, L layers, and embedding dimension d, each agent computes a query-key inner product with all n − 1 neighbors, requiring O(n2d) operations per layer. The full forward pass is therefore O(Ln 2d) per timestep, compared to O(nd ) for QMIX and O(Lnd ) for GCN-based methods such as DICG. This quadratic scaling in n is the standard cost–coordination trade-off in graph-based MARL. In practice, with L = 2 ,

n ≤ 12 , and d = din (typically small in our environments), the overhead is modest. However, the parameter analysis in Figure 14 reveals a perhaps counterintuitive fact: SACHI ’s total parameter count ( 31 K) is lower than QMIX ( 40 K), QTRAN (41 K), IQL ( 102 K), DGN ( 150 K), and QPLEX ( 231 K). This is because the graph transformer’s learnable parameters are fully shared across agents and independent of n, i.e., the total count is O(Ld 2), while SACHI ’s feedforward agent network (∼4K) is substantially cheaper than the GRU used by many baselines ( ∼27 K). The coordination module adds computa-tional cost per forward pass but not model capacity in the sense that drives overfitting. For very large teams ( n > 50 ), the quadratic attention cost may become prohibitive; sparsification of the coordination graph or hierarchical grouping strategies represent natural adaptations. 

c) Scalability: Scalability in cooperative multi-agent sys-tems concerns maintaining effective coordination as interaction size and complexity grow. The key design principle of SACHI ’s coordination mechanism is disentangled from common scala-bility axes such as team size, action space, and observation structure. It operates over a permutation-equivariant graph with shared parameters, while task-specific variability is han-dled at the input and output interfaces. Across environments ranging from n = 2 to 12 , SACHI uses the same architec-ture without structural modification, with parameter sharing inducing permutation equivariance, i.e., for any permutation 

π, ˜hπ(i) = f (hπ(1) , . . . , hπ(n))π(i). Furthermore, the evalua-tion suite spans movement, communication, and hybrid tasks with varying observation dimensionality. The encoder ϕenc 

maps observations to a fixed embedding, decoupling message passing from input size, while the policy head ψ localizes dependence on |A i|, making the coordination module invariant to both action and observation dimensions. Despite variation in observation structure (e.g., role asymmetry, adversarial signals, symmetry-breaking), the query-key attention adapts implicitly as αij ∝ exp(( W3hi)⊤(W4hj )/√din ), evaluating the relevance of agent j’s signal from agent i’s perspective without task-specific assumptions. 

d) When to apply SACHI ? And when not to?: SACHI is most effective in cooperative settings where useful information is distributed across agents and must be selectively integrated for decision-making. It is well-suited for tasks with partial ob-servability, dynamic or context-dependent coordination struc-ture, and heterogeneous agent roles, such as communication tasks, spatial coordination, and mixed cooperative-adversarial 14 

environments. In these settings, its receiver-dependent atten-tion and adaptive coordination graph enable agents to extract the right information from the right peers at the right time, leading to both faster learning and strong final performance.  

> SACHI

can be considered less beneficial in settings where coordination is minimal or trivial, such as fully observable environments or tasks that decompose cleanly into independent subproblems. In such cases, simpler methods (e.g., inde-pendent learners or value decomposition) may suffice with lower computational overhead. Additionally, in very large-scale systems with strict communication or latency constraints, the intricate attention mechanism may introduce scalability challenges unless appropriately pruned or approximated. VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we proposed SACHI for cooperative MARL to address action coordination as a policy-level problem of structured information integration. By enriching each agent’s representation with coordination-relevant signals from team-mates through graph transformer convolutions over an inter-agent coordination graph, SACHI enables decentralized agents to jointly produce coherent action profiles. The key archi-tectural insight is that effective coordination requires not the collection of all available information, but its intelligent, receiver-sensitive distillation: the graph transformer’s content-dependent attention allows each agent to selectively accu-mulate precisely what it needs from its neighbors, given its own current state. Empirical evaluation across five cooperative tasks, spanning spatial, communicative and adversarial co-ordination challenges, demonstrates consistent improvements over twelve baselines covering the full range of coordination methodologies, and ablations confirm that the gains are at-tributable to the inductive bias of the graph transformer rather than increased model capacity. We hope this work encourages further treatment of action coordination as a first-class problem in cooperative MARL, and anticipate that the structured infor-mation integration perspective developed here will generalize to richer settings involving larger agent teams, heterogeneous roles, and partially known coordination topologies. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work is supported by DEVCOM ARL Army Research Office; Grant: W911NF2420194; and U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF); Grant: OAC-2411446. Distribution State-ment A: Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. REFERENCES 

[1] J. Mooney, The principles of organization . Harper & Row, 1947. [Online]. Available: https://books.google. com/books?id=d7rczgEACAAJ [2] F. A. Oliehoek, C. Amato et al. , A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs . Springer, 2016, vol. 1. [3] D. S. Bernstein, R. Givan, N. Immerman, and S. Zil-berstein, “The complexity of decentralized control of markov decision processes,” Mathematics of operations research , vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 819–840, 2002. [4] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi, M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls et al. , “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296 , 2017. [5] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 21, no. 178, pp. 1–51, 2020. [6] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2017. [7] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu, “The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games,” Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 24 611–24 624, 2022. [8] T. Li, K. Zhu, N. C. Luong, D. Niyato, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, and B. Chen, “Applications of multi-agent reinforcement learning in future internet: A comprehensive survey,” 

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1240–1279, 2022. [9] A. Oroojlooy and D. Hajinezhad, “A review of cooper-ative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Intelligence , vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 13 677–13 722, 2023. [10] Y. Wang, M. Damani, P. Wang, Y. Cao, and G. Sartoretti, “Distributed reinforcement learning for robot teams: A review,” Current Robotics Reports , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 239– 257, 2022. [11] D. Marek, P. Biernacki, J. Szyguła, A. Doma´ nski, M. Paszkuta, M. Szczygieł, M. Kr´ ol, and K. Woj-ciechowski, “Collision avoidance mechanism for swarms of drones,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 4, p. 1141, 2025. [12] S. Yunsheng, H. Zhengjie, F. Shikun, Z. Hui, W. Wenjing, and S. Yu, “Masked label prediction: Unified message passing model for semi-supervised classification,” Pro-ceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 1548–1554, 08 2021. [13] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, and B. De Schutter, “A com-prehensive survey of multiagent reinforcement learning,” 

IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 156–172, 2008. [14] P. Hernandez-Leal, B. Kartal, and M. E. Taylor, “A survey and critique of multiagent deep reinforcement learning,” Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems ,vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 750–797, 2019. [15] M. Tan, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Indepen-dent vs. cooperative agents,” in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on machine learning , 1993, pp. 330–337. [16] L. Matignon, G. J. Laurent, and N. Le Fort-Piat, “In-dependent reinforcement learners in cooperative markov games: a survey regarding coordination problems,” The Knowledge Engineering Review , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2012. 15 

[17] C. Claus and C. Boutilier, “The dynamics of rein-forcement learning in cooperative multiagent systems,” 

AAAI/IAAI , vol. 1998, no. 746-752, p. 2, 1998. [18] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. De Freitas, and S. White-son, “Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. [19] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus et al. , “Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation,” Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. [20] A. Das, T. Gervet, J. Romoff, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rabbat, and J. Pineau, “Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication,” in International Conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 1538–1546. [21] T. Wang, H. Dong, V. Lesser, and C. Zhang, “Roma: multi-agent reinforcement learning with emergent roles,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020. [22] C. Li, T. Wang, C. Wu, Q. Zhao, J. Yang, and C. Zhang, “Celebrating diversity in shared multi-agent reinforce-ment learning,” Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 3991–4002, 2021. [23] C. S. De Witt, T. Gupta, D. Makoviichuk, V. Makoviy-chuk, P. H. Torr, M. Sun, and S. Whiteson, “Is indepen-dent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020. [24] J. G. Kuba, R. Chen, M. Wen, Y. Wen, F. Sun, J. Wang, and Y. Yang, “Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=EcGGFkNTxdJ [25] L. Kraemer and B. Banerjee, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning,” Neu-rocomputing , vol. 190, pp. 82–94, 2016. [26] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “Qtran: Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in 

International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 5887–5896. [27] J. Wang, Z. Ren, T. Liu, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang, “Qplex: Duplex dueling multi-agent q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01062 , 2020. [28] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson, “Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradi-ents,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [29] C. Guestrin, M. Lagoudakis, and R. Parr, “Coordinated reinforcement learning,” in ICML , vol. 2, 2002, pp. 227– 234. [30] W. B¨ ohmer, V. Kurin, and S. Whiteson, “Deep coordi-nation graphs,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 980–991. [31] S. Li, J. K. Gupta, P. Morales, R. Allen, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Deep implicit coordination graphs for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Adaptive Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , 2020. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219966887 [32] Q. Yang, W. Dong, Z. Ren, J. Wang, T. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Self-organized polynomial-time coordination graphs,” in International conference on machine learn-ing . PMLR, 2022, pp. 24 963–24 979. [33] T. Wang, L. Zeng, W. Dong, Q. Yang, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang, “Context-aware sparse deep coordination graphs,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [Online]. Available: https:// openreview.net/forum?id=wQfgfb8VKTn [34] N. Gupta, J. Z. Hare, R. Kannan, and V. Prasanna, “Deep meta coordination graphs for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04028 , 2025. [35] N. Gupta, G. Srinivasaraghavan, S. Mohalik, N. Kumar, and M. E. Taylor, “Hammer: Multi-level coordination of reinforcement learning agents via learned messaging,” 

Neural Computing and Applications , vol. 37, no. 19, pp. 13 221–13 236, 2025. [36] N. Gupta, L. Twardecka, J. Z. Hare, J. Milzman, R. Kan-nan, and V. Prasanna, “Tiger-marl: Enhancing multi-agent reinforcement learning with temporal information through graph-based embeddings and representations,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08832 , 2025. [37] N. Gupta, J. Z. Hare, J. Milzman, R. Kannan, and V. Prasanna, “Action-graph policies: Learning action co-dependencies in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.17009 , 2026. [38] J. Jiang, C. Dun, T. Huang, and Z. Lu, “Graph convolutional reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= HkxdQkSYDB [39] A. Malysheva, T. T. Sung, C.-B. Sohn, D. Kudenko, and A. Shpilman, “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning with relevance graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12557 ,2018. [40] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Zambaldi, M. Malinowski, A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner et al. , “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261 , 2018. [41] S. Nayak, K. Choi, W. Ding, S. Dolan, K. Gopalakr-ishnan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Scalable multi-agent rein-forcement learning through intelligent information aggre-gation,” in International conference on machine learning .PMLR, 2023, pp. 25 817–25 833. [42] P. Veliˇ ckovi´ c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li` o, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum? id=rJXMpikCZ [43] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforce-ment learning with double q-learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 30, no. 1, 2016. [44] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classifica-tion with graph convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJU4ayYgl 16 

[45] N. Naderializadeh, F. H. Hung, S. Soleyman, and D. Khosla, “Graph convolutional value decomposition in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04740 , 2020. [46] Y. Kang, T. Wang, Q. Yang, X. Wu, and C. Zhang, “Non-linear coordination graphs,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 25 655– 25 666, 2022. [47] W. Duan, J. Lu, and J. Xuan, “Group-aware coordination graph for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , ser. IJCAI ’24, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai. 2024/434 [48] T. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Wang, G. Xie, and Z. Lu, “Fop: Fac-torizing optimal joint policy of maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in International confer-ence on machine learning . PMLR, 2021, pp. 12 491– 12 500. [49] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, L. Sch¨ afer, and S. V. Albrecht, “Benchmarking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks,” in Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks (NeurIPS) , 2021. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07869 [50] M. Samvelyan, T. Rashid, C. S. de Witt, G. Farquhar, N. Nardelli, T. G. J. Rudner, C.-M. Hung, P. H. S. Torr, J. Foerster, and S. Whiteson, “The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge,” CoRR , vol. abs/1902.04043, 2019. [51] J. Hu, S. Wang, S. Jiang, and M. Wang, “Rethinking the implementation tricks and monotonicity constraint in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in The Second Blogpost Track at ICLR 2023 , 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=Y8hONVbMSDj [52] R. Agarwal, M. Schwarzer, P. S. Castro, A. C. Courville, and M. Bellemare, “Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 34, pp. 29 304– 29 320, 2021. [53] J. Demˇ sar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,” Journal of Machine learning re-search , vol. 7, no. Jan, pp. 1–30, 2006. [54] A. Shehzad, F. Xia, S. Abid, C. Peng, S. Yu, D. Zhang, and K. Verspoor, “Graph transformers: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems ,2026. [55] T. K. Rusch, M. M. Bronstein, and S. Mishra, “A sur-vey on oversmoothing in graph neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10993 , 2023. [56] C. Cai and Y. Wang, “A note on over-smoothing for graph neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13318 ,2020.