Title: AI In Cybersecurity Education -- Scalable Agentic CTF Design Principles and Educational Outcomes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21551v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:08:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# AI In Cybersecurity Education - Scalable Agentic CTF Design Principles and Educational Outcomes 

Haoran Xi 1∗, Minghao Shao 1,2∗, Kimberly Milner 1∗, Venkata Sai Charan Putrevu 1∗, Nanda Rani 3∗, Meet Udeshi 1∗, Prashanth Krishnamurthy 1, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt 4, Siddharth Garg 1, Sandeep Kumar Shukla 5,Farshad Khorrami 1, Alon Hillel-Tuch 1, Muhammad Shafique 2, Ramesh Karri 1

Abstract —Large language models are rapidly changing how learners acquire and demonstrate cybersecurity skills. However, when human–AI collaboration is allowed, educators still lack val-idated competition designs and evaluation practices that remain fair and evidence-based. This paper presents a cross-regional study of LLM-centered Capture-the-Flag competitions built on the Cyber Security Awareness Week competition system. To un-derstand how autonomy levels and participants’ knowledge back-grounds influence problem-solving performance and learning-related behaviors, we formalize three autonomy levels: human-in-the-loop, autonomous agent frameworks, and hybrid. To enable verification, we require traceable submissions including conver-sation logs, agent trajectories, and agent code. We analyze multi-region competition data covering an in-class track, a standard track, and a year-long expert track, each targeting participants with different knowledge backgrounds. Using data from the 2025 competition, we compare solve performance across autonomy levels and challenge categories, and observe that autonomous agent frameworks and hybrid achieve higher completion rates on challenges requiring iterative testing and tool interactions. In the in-class track, we classify participants’ agent designs and find a preference for lightweight, tool-augmented prompting and reflection-based retries over complex multi-agent architectures. Our results offer actionable guidance for designing LLM-assisted cybersecurity competitions as learning technologies, including autonomy-specific scoring criteria, evidence requirements that support solution verification, and track structures that improve accessibility while preserving reliable evaluation and engagement. 

Index Terms —Capture The Flag, Large Language Models, Artificial Intelligence, Cybersecurity, Competition Design 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently demon-strated strong capabilities over complex tasks, generating executable code, and providing iterative, targeted feedback[1], [2], [3]. In educational contexts, these abilities allow learners to rapidly test hypotheses, debug mistakes, and refine their understanding, suggesting that LLMs can serve as powerful tools for both problem-solving and reflective learning. This shift is no longer confined to classrooms. LLM-based assis-tants are increasingly integrated into real-world cybersecurity workflows, supporting activities such as code comprehension, and exploit development[4], [5], [6], [7]. In practice, however, it remains unclear to what extent LLM assistance improves security task performance, where its limitations emerge, and how educational competitions should be designed to evaluate these abilities fairly while still supporting learning.        

> ∗Equal contribution. 1NYU Tandon, 2NYU Abu Dhabi, 3CISPA, 4XBOW,
> 5IIIT Hyderabad. 2023 2024 2025
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> Count
> 17
> 42
> 95
> 33
> 96
> 299
> Teams Enrolled
> Participants Enrolled

Fig. 1: Participation growth in the LLM CTF competition. Recent studies explore these questions using CTF tasks and agentic systems. Security researchers evaluate agentic LLMs via interactive cyber-tasks, with CTFs serving as a testbed for multi-step planning, tool use, and execution feedback[8], [9], [10]. To improve reproducibility, open-source benchmarks[11], [12] provide dockerized CTF benchmarks collected from real-world CTF competitions and evaluation frameworks [13]. In parallel, LLM-driven penetration testing systems show that structured LLM workflows can support end-to-end task com-pletion on both real targets and CTF-style challenges[14], [15]. Despite this progress, prior studies[16] tend to emphasize point performance or system completion, and many treat LLMs as passive, prompt-driven assistants[17]. While[11] provides the benchmark and[9] evaluates model performance, this paper contributes the organizational and pedagogical design frame-work, the autonomy taxonomy with evidence requirements, and the interaction log analysis, none of which appear in prior work. As a result, open questions remain about how to design autonomy-aware assessments and capture learning-relevant behaviors when human–AI collaboration is permitted in real-world CTF environments. Real-world CTF solving involves multi-step reasoning: par-ticipants must debug mistakes, select appropriate tools, and refine their approaches, all of which reflect real-world security practice. When LLMs are used, human–AI interaction pro-duces learning traces that reveal how reasoning evolves over time. A missing piece is understanding how the level of human involvement changes what LLM assistance means in prac-tice. LLMs assist human-steered workflows drive autonomous agents executing tool actions with minimal intervention. These distinctions matter for evaluation and education. If we only examine final flags, we cannot determine whether success stems from the model’s capability, from human steering, or 

> arXiv:2603.21551v1 [cs.SE] 23 Mar 2026 2

from the division of labor between them, and we lose valuable signals such as iteration patterns, tool choice, debugging strate-gies, and error recovery. Designing LLM-assisted competitions that are fair and comparable across teams while supporting participants with diverse backgrounds becomes difficult. To address these gaps, we organized an international LLM-assisted CTF competition across the US–Canada, MENA, and India regions. As shown in Figure 1, participation grew substantially from 2023 to 2025 in both team counts and total participants, indicating an expanding multi-year deployment. Teams submitted solutions under clearly defined autonomy levels, including human-in-the-loop, agentic frameworks, and hybrid workflows, along with traceable process records such as conversation logs and agent trajectories produced during solving. This enables us to study not only outcomes but also how different degrees of automation shape reasoning behaviors, tool use, and solution strategies. Based on this setting, our paper addresses three research questions: RQ1: 

How does human–AI autonomy influence performance and problem-solving in LLM-assisted CTF tasks? RQ2: What or-ganizational principles support fair, learning-oriented competi-tions centered on LLM-assisted cybersecurity for participants with diverse backgrounds? RQ3: What prompt engineering techniques and agent architecture design choices lead to ef-fective reasoning and successful solutions in CTF tasks? To address these RQs , we conduct a comprehensive study of LLM-assisted CTFs and make three contributions.  

> •

We present a comprehensive study of LLM use in offensive cybersecurity, grounded in real competition data, analyzing both outcomes and process traces.  

> •

We provide guidance for researchers in building evidence-based and autonomous competition designs supporting veri-fiable, comparable evaluation in LLM-assisted CTF settings.  

> •

We distill transferable prompt engineering techniques and agent architecture design choices observed in practice, of-fering actionable recommendations to improve effectiveness and lower entry barriers in educational CTF environments. II. B ACKGROUND 

A. Capture the Flag (CTF) and Education Application 

Capture the Flag (CTF) competitions trace their roots to the DEF CON conference in the mid 1990s[18] and have since evolved into a common vehicle for cybersecurity training and education in both universities and industry[19]. Today, long running events such as picoCTF[20], RuCTF[21], and UCSB iCTF[22], together with platforms like CTFd[23] and Hack The Box[24], offer structured challenges and gamified labs that support a wide range of experience levels. While CTFs were initially valued as legal environments for practicing offensive and defensive techniques, their role has expanded to include staff training, skill evaluation[24], and community knowledge sharing through writeups and reusable tools[19]. In terms of competition design, modern CTFs are typically organized in two formats: Jeopardy, where participants solve independent challenges for points, and Attack Defense, where teams concurrently attack and defend network services. Table I TABLE I: Representative CTF categories.             

> Category Typical focus
> Crypto Misused/weakened cryptographic schemes (e.g., recover se-crets; break flawed key exchange); requires number theory, common primitives, and scripting. Forensics Digital investigations: analyze files, memory dumps, and net-work traces to recover hidden data and reconstruct events. Pwn Exploit memory-safety/logic bugs in binaries (e.g., overflow, UAF) to gain access or read protected data; requires exploit writing, low-level programming, and debugging. Rev Analyze compiled programs without source to extract secrets or find exploitable behavior; uses disassembly/decompilation and control/data-flow reasoning. Web Exploit web apps/APIs via injection, XSS, or broken auth; requires HTTP/web frameworks, client–server knowledge, and basic network analysis. Misc Unconventional challenges (often emerging tech) requiring creative problem solving and flexible tool use.

summarizes six widely used CTF challenge categories: crypto, forensics, pwn, rev, web, and misc. CTFs collectively require a broad range of cybersecurity knowledge and hands-on skills, including programming, de-bugging, and multi-step reasoning[19]. Accordingly, well-designed challenges should reflect realistic attack scenarios within controlled environments[25] and to sequence difficulty progressively so that technical realism is preserved while both beginners and experienced participants remain engaged. Beyond competitions, CTFs are widely integrated into courses, assessments, and professional training as educational tools[25]. By combining challenge-based learning with real-istic practice, they can cover a broad range of cybersecurity knowledge and skills[19] while also improving learner moti-vation and conceptual understanding relative to traditional lab formats[25], [26]. Recent education-first CTF designs further suggest that a carefully staged learning curve can guide learn-ers through complex tasks without sacrificing engagement[27]. At the same time, CTF difficulty can create entry barriers for beginners and impose repetitive overhead on experienced participants[26], highlighting a persistent trade-off between technical realism and sustained engagement. 

B. Large Language Models (LLMs) 

Large language models are primarily built on the trans-former architecture[28], [29], which enables attention-based models to capture long-range dependencies at scale. Build-ing on this foundation, scaling efforts such as GPT-3[30] demonstrated few-shot learning and in-context generalization, helping establish LLMs as a core component of modern AI assistants. Most LLMs are trained as next-token predictors over large corpora of text and code. When combined with instruction tuning and alignment techniques[31], they can better follow user instructions, produce step-by-step solutions, and generate structured outputs. Despite these strengths, LLMs may hallucinate, inherit biases from their training data[32], and exhibit limitations on some precise reasoning tasks[33]. Recent models such as ChatGPT[34], Qwen[35], and Claude[36] exhibit strong performance in language under-standing, code generation, and multi-step reasoning[37]. At the same time, domain-specialized variants have emerged for 3

programming[38], science[39], and finance[40]. In software development workflows, LLMs have been adopted to gener-ate code[41], refactor existing implementations[42], explain errors[43], and suggest bug fixes[44]. These capabilities align with cybersecurity practice, which involves interpreting code, writing scripts, and operating diverse tool chains. 

C. Applications of AI Systems a) AI for Cybersecurity: Cybersecurity workflows are in-herently iterative: practitioners repeatedly execute commands, interpret feedback, and refine strategies. Recent work therefore frames LLM-based systems as tool-interactive loops that oper-ate in containerized environments and choose the next action based on observed execution results[45]. Within this paradigm, LLMs have been explored across a wide range of cybersecurity tasks. These include CTF-style exploitation requiring multi-step tool use[11], [10], penetration testing through staged subtask decomposition and planning[14], [15], hardware se-curity attack and analysis workflows[46], and fuzzing-oriented input generation to expand coverage and trigger failures[47]. Other efforts explore LLM-assisted vulnerability detection and localization[48], as well as automated vulnerability patching supported by exploit-based execution validation[49]. 

b) AI for Education: LLMs can provide on-demand learning support through explanations, hints, and step-by-step guidance, and they have been shown to improve aca-demic performance in certain settings[50]. At the same time, concerns about hallucinations[51] and over-reliance[52] have motivated research on response verification and responsible-use guidance[53], [51]. Empirically, LLMs have been applied to teaching and learning support in several forms, including formative feedback and misconception diagnosis[54], self-regulated learning support[55], and instructor-facing tasks such as rubric and quiz generation[56]. Across these roles, effec-tive deployment depends on careful instructional design and reliability-aware use. 

c) AI for cybersecurity competitions: Cybersecurity com-petitions have also become an important evaluation mech-anism for LLM-driven systems. DARPA’s AI Cyber Chal-lenge (AIxCC), for instance, tasks teams with building au-tomated systems that discover and patch vulnerabilities under strict time constraints, with fixes validated through automated verification[57], [58]. This setting highlights how competition-driven benchmarks can catalyze end-to-end progress in auto-mated security workflows. CSAW hosts both an LLM CTF Attack Challenge, which supports human-in-the-loop or agent-based solving[59], and an Agentic Automated CTF that em-phasizes fully autonomous agents[59]. Hack The Box’s AI vs Human CTF further evaluates autonomous agents against human professionals[60]. However, beyond benchmarking, cy-bersecurity competitions also serve as learning environments, when AI assistance is permitted, organizers must consider educational impact, learner over-reliance, and process validity, not only end-to-end performance. A complementary line of work evaluates the security of LLMs themselves. Competitions such as HackAPrompt[61] and the DEF CON AI Village red-teaming event[62] curate adversarial prompts and interaction datasets, providing evidence that LLMs remain vulnerable to adversarial prompting and related manipulation strategies. III. R ELATED WORK 

Prior work has examined LLM-assisted CTF solving from multiple perspectives, including model comparisons and academic integrity implications[63], fairness concerns and broader competition-integrity implications of LLM assistance in CTF competitions[64], analyses that contrast human-in-the-loop workflows with fully automated pipelines[9], and studies of autonomous solving that report practical failure modes even on beginner-level challenges[65]. Taken together, these results suggest that LLMs can contribute meaningfully to portions of the CTF workflow, but that reliable evaluation depends on actionable execution feedback and reproducible experimental settings. In this context, CTFs have also been adopted as a standard benchmark for assessing LLM-based multi-step reasoning, task planning, and tool use in offensive security[11]. Several recent benchmark environments package challenges into interactive environments with runnable instances and exe-cution feedback. InterCode-CTF[66] provides a controlled in-teractive setting with execution feedback, while CyBench[12] offers a similarly structured benchmark with finer-grained subtask-level evaluation, NYU CTF Bench[11] contributes a scalable open-source benchmark together with an automated agent framework, and CTF-Dojo[67] offers dockerized chal-lenges with strong reproducibility guarantees. Within these environments, researchers further investigate how agent design influences outcomes. Turtayev et al.[17] shows that straightfor-ward prompting with baseline tool use can already solve many education-level challenges, while HackSynth[68] extends this approach with a dual-module design that separates planning from summarization and processes feedback iteratively. For more complex tasks, EnIGMA[10] introduces interactive de-bugger and terminal tools, and D-CIPHER[1] adopts a multi-agent design that separates planning from execution and incor-porates dynamic feedback loops. Beyond agent architecture, another recurring challenge is access to task-specific security knowledge. CTFAgent[8] addresses this challenge with a two-stage retrieval-augmented generation pipeline. CRAKEN[69] integrates CTF write-up retrieval with iterative self-reflected execution, improving performance on NYU CTF Bench. Another line of work improves CTF solving at model level via training and fine-tuning. Representative approaches include collecting interaction trajectories from reproducible environ-ments for supervision[67], performing runtime-free training using write-ups together with simulated traces[70], and apply-ing category-specific reinforcement learning, such as GRPO-based fine-tuning on generated cryptography challenges[71]. In parallel, recent years have seen dedicated LLM-assisted CTF competitions that operationalize these ideas in realistic settings. Tang et al.[72] also examines human–AI collabora-tion in a live cybersecurity CTF competition under shared challenge conditions. Complementary to its evaluation and collaboration focus, our work emphasizes educational impact and guidelines for organizers to run autonomy-aware, learning-oriented competitions. Despite this progress, no prior work has 4

jointly examined how autonomy mode shapes human problem-solving behavior in LLM-assisted CTFs, how performance differences relate to interaction design choices observable in trace data, and how these findings can be translated into concrete educational and organizational guidance for compe-tition design. Our study addresses this gap by analyzing a LLM-assisted CTF competition through three complementary lenses: outcome differences across autonomy modes, traceable interaction evidence of human–AI collaboration, and design guidelines for fair, learning-oriented competitions. IV. M ETHODS 

A. Competition Overview 

CSAW is a global student-run cybersecurity event and experiential learning platform[59]. Within CSAW, we organize the LLM CTF Attack Competition, a competition designed to evaluate automated CTF solving. The competition is held across three regions: US–Canada in person or remotely format, MENA in person, and India remotely, with teams of up to three participants. The challenge set spans six categories, namely pwn, web, crypto, reverse engineering, forensics, and misc, comprising 5–50 challenges per track. Challenges are drawn from CSAW datasets and distributed in a standardized format for LLM-assisted solving. Over three years, the competition has incorporated different levels of solution autonomy to examine varying modes of human–AI collaboration. A parallel extended-duration event emphasizes fully autonomous agent workflows and attracts more advanced participants[59]. Submissions are evaluated using a 100-point rubric refined annually to reflect evolving competition formats and evaluation priorities. In 2023, evaluation used four components: Scale at 50%, Creativity at 30%, Speed at 10%, and Demonstration at 10%. In 2024, the rubric shifted toward Challenge Solved at 50%, Creativity at 30%, and Presentation Quality at 20%. In 2025, the rubric emphasized creativity more heavily, weighting Creativity at 50%, Challenge Solved at 30%, and Presentation Quality at 20%, with additional bonus credit for autonomous approaches. Challenges associated with rule violations were excluded from scoring. Challenge Solved is calculated from the percentage of challenges solved in the provided challenge set, weighted by each challenge’s score. Let C denote the set of challenges released in a given year and wi > 0 the organizer-provided weight for challenge i ∈ C . For each team t, we define a binary solve indicator st,i ∈ { 0, 1}, where st,i = 1 

if the submitted flag for challenge i matches the ground-truth flag and 0 otherwise. The solve score is: 

S(t) = 100 ·

P 

> i∈C

wi st,i 

P 

> i∈C

wi

. (1) Creativity measures the novelty and effectiveness of prompt-ing strategies and agent workflows, including tool use and architectural design. In 2025, up to 25% bonus credit was awarded for autonomous or customized frameworks that pro-vided detailed trajectories, even without solved challenges. Presentation Quality evaluates the clarity with which teams communicate their approach in final presentations. To protect competition integrity and ensure that submitted traces reflect 

Fig. 2: Competition background track comparison. realistic LLM-assisted reasoning, teams were prohibited from using public writeups or externally sourced code. A submis-sion was eligible for scoring only if it included traceable process evidence, such as complete human-in-the-loop conver-sation logs or untampered agent trajectories, consistent with the claimed workflow and corresponding tool outputs. We review these logs to verify that the submitted flag follows from the recorded intermediate observations and actions. If a submission lacked traceability or showed an unverified jump to a correct flag, that challenge received no score. 

B. Competition Design and Participants 

This subsection addresses RQ2 by describing the orga-nizational design principles used to support fair, learning-oriented LLM-assisted cybersecurity competitions for partici-pants with diverse backgrounds. The competition is structured to support participants with diverse security backgrounds while maintaining comparable, analyzable submissions. Three objectives guide the design: (1) lowering entry barriers for beginners while preserving expert engagement, (2) requiring intermediate evidence such as planned actions, tool outputs, and debugging iterations rather than final flags alone, and (3) enabling analysis of conversation logs and agent trajectories to study differences in solving strategies across autonomy levels and participant backgrounds. To support these objec-tives, we define three competition tracks: in-class , standard ,and expert , representing increasing difficulty, support, and engineering effort. Tracks determine timeline, dataset scope, educational support, and submission requirements. Autonomy levels, including HITL, agentic, and hybrid which combines these two as described in Section IV-C, are defined at the submission level and may vary per challenge, particularly in the standard track. Figure 2 illustrates their relationship. Track differences are captured by six design factors: (1) primary goal, specifying the track-level objective, (2) support and guidance mechanisms, (3) challenge set size and difficulty, (4) engineering labor, (5) expected deliverables, and (6) evalu-ation emphasis within a shared rubric. Table II compares these factors across the three tracks and clarifies how track design choices connect to our evidence collection and verification requirements. The three tracks correspond to three competition events: (1) an in-class competition for beginners held in 2025 in the US–Canada region, (2) the CSAW LLM CTF Attack Competition , which serves as the standard track and was conducted in 2025 across the US–Canada, MENA, and India regions, and (3) the Agentic CTF Competition , an expert track event run worldwide on a year-long basis. Together, 5

TABLE II: Competition background track differences across design factors.                                

> Design factor In-class track Standard track Expert track a) Primary goal Lower barriers; teach CTF solving. Realistic competition settings and con-straints. Agentic framework innovation.
> b) Support and guidance Live demos, guided walkthroughs, recorded exploitation videos with instructor-supervised. Public FAQ, announcements, limited technical support. Provide agent frameworks for reference.
> c) Challenge set size and difficulty
> Smaller/easier subset; 5LLM-solvable challenges. 16 challenges; normal difficulty and cat-egory coverage. 50 challenges; normal difficulty and cat-egory coverage.
> d) Engineering labor Moderate; emphasize learning workflows over heavy engineering. Varies by team’s chosen approach. High; build/extend autonomous frame-works and tool-chains.
> e) Expected deliverables Demonstrate multi-step understanding; it-erate prompts/scripts; explain reasoning. Solve under realistic constraints while documenting workflow choices. Demonstrate agent design: planning, tool use, evidence collection, strategy revision.
> f) Evaluation emphasis Process quality and learning reflections. Solve rate, workflow creativity. Automation quality, workflow innovation.

these tracks support learners at different stages while allowing us to observe how LLM-assisted workflows evolve under increasing levels of automation and engineering effort. 

a) In-class track: Figure 3 illustrates the in-class track, designed for beginners lacking offensive security experience. Participants learn in a supported lab environment featuring, including live demos, guided exploitation walkthroughs, step-by-step tutorial videos, and introductory slides on CTF con-cepts and LLM-assisted workflows. This track uses a smaller, easier challenge set over an extended five-week timeline to facilitate for environment onboarding and tool familiarization. Our deployment includes five binary exploitation challenges, proven LLM-solvable via ChatGPT. The relaxed setting en-courages autonomous agent development and documentation of iterative design and validation steps. 

b) Standard track.: Figure 4 shows the standard track, which reflects a realistic competition setting. Participants use the standard interface without guided demonstrations and solve the full challenge set of 16 challenges within a ten-day timeline. Challenges are distributed in a database format optimized for LLM-assisted solving, with ground-truth flags included for verification. Limited technical support is available for environment issues. To accommodate real-world variation in how participants use LLMs, teams may select human-in-the-loop, autonomous, or hybrid workflows for each challenge. This flexibility enables controlled comparisons of autonomy levels under identical challenge conditions. 

Fig. 3: Competition design for In-class Track. 

c) Expert track.: Figure 5 presents the expert track targeting advanced participants. It uses a 50-challenge set to evaluate performance at a broader and more demanding scale. A baseline agent framework is provided to reduce setup over-head, and teams extend it with additional tooling, multi-agent coordination, and retrieval-augmented components to support autonomous exploitation. This track requires fully autonomous agent development and involves higher engineering effort. A three-month timeline supports iterative system design, debug-ging, and evaluation, enabling analysis of advanced agent performance under extended refinement cycles. Participants represent from diverse academic and industry backgrounds, including undergraduate and graduate students alongside a smaller expert cohort. Offensive security expertise spans from beginners with minimal hands-on exposure to experts in exploitation and vulnerability discovery. Across three competition tracks, participation included 29, 265, and 5 competitors respectively, totaling 299 participants who formed 95 teams across three regions. To reflect prior knowledge vari-ation, we group participants into three background categories aligned with track structure and support needs: 1) In-class students: Guided course or lab attendees receiving structured instruction on CTF fundamentals: vulnerability identification, exploitation, and validation. 2) Typical STEM students: Undergraduate and graduate students from Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity related programs without specialized 

Fig. 4: Competition design for Standard Track. 6

Fig. 5: Competition design for Expert Track. security training or prior CTF experience. 3) Experts: Experienced competitors and industry profession-als with CTF or professional security experience, such as vulnerability research, reverse engineering, exploitation development, or penetration testing. Participant recruitment combined open registration, university faculty outreach, and security course integration. A public competition homepage[59] and leaderboard[11] helped to at-tract community participants and experienced solvers, using prizes and public rankings to incentivize engagement. 

C. Competition Solutions 

We defined three solution types based on workflow auton-omy: human-in-the-loop (HITL), autonomous framework ,and hybrid , which combines the two. This classification is necessary because a matched flag alone does not reveal the solving process. CTF solving involves multi-step, tool-integrated workflows including planning, evidence collection, iterative debugging, and validation. Traceable evidence is therefore required to enable comparison of reasoning and action sequences. We characterize autonomy levels using the workflow control factors listed in Table III, including decision authority, degree of human involvement, engineering barrier and other factors. HITL solutions are captured through conversational logs, while autonomous frameworks produce agent trajectories, and hybrid solutions may include both forms of evidence. These artifacts support analysis of interaction patterns, tool usage, iteration behavior, and verification of claimed solving workflows. 

a) Human-in-the-loop (HITL): solutions that humans in-teract directly with LLMs for planning, debugging, and code generation. This lowers entry barriers while requiring that flags be obtained through LLM-assisted workflows. Teams submit complete conversation logs covering prompts and responses, intermediate outputs and proof of flag capture, and a brief report describing their strategy and LLM usage. These mate-rials make reasoning traceable and enable analysis of strategy revisions following failed attempts. 

b) Autonomous framework: solutions are defined by LLM-led decision-making and tool execution. Teams build or adapt agent systems that plan next steps and execute commands such as running binaries, collecting evidence, and iterating exploit attempts. Humans may start, stop, or monitor execution but do not intervene during solving. This autonomy level evaluates end-to-end automation in realistic settings, where success depends on evidence collection, tool usage, and iterative recovery from errors. Teams submit untampered agent trajectories recording thoughts, actions, and observa-tions, along with the complete code and data repository. These artifacts verify that flags result from intermediate reasoning steps and support analysis of evidence collection, tool errors, retry mechanisms, and iterative planning. 

c) Hybrid: solutions merge HITL interaction with au-tonomous execution, sharing human-agent responsibility. Be-cause division of labor varies, handoff points must be explicit. Teams submit complete conversational logs documenting hu-man prompts, decisions, and interpretations, agent trajectories capturing autonomous tool actions and observations, and sup-porting code. These materials enable us to identify handoff points, attribute actions to humans or agents, and analyze division-of-labor strategies regarding solving outcomes. 

D. Contestant Connection 1) Competition Communication: We used email and aDiscord server to support participants before, during, and after the competition. Email was used for registration, onboarding, and post-competition follow-up, while Discord served as the primary real-time communication channel during the event for announcements, technical questions, and organizer support. To accommodate different regions, time zones, and local policies, the server included region-specific channels, helping maintain clear and consistent communication across teams. 

2) Submissions: All teams submitted their work via GitHub Classroom[73]. Each team received a dedicated repository as the single submission location and was instructed to commit conversation logs, agent trajectories, code, and writeups de-scribing how each flag was obtained, including key decisions and reproduction steps. This ensured consistent and traceable evidence collection in a standardized format across teams. V. A NALYSIS 

We only compare teams when they work on the same challenge and use the same flag verification procedure to ensure fair comparison. Beyond checking the flag itself, we re-view conversational logs and agent trajectories to confirm that each flag was discovered through an LLM-assisted workflow rather than copied from challenge metadata or online writeups. Submissions that contain a correct flag but lack supporting intermediate steps are excluded from analysis. These measures maintain comparability across results and preserve a traceable record of the solving process. All conclusions are grounded in observable interaction traces from submissions that qualify as valid and comply with competition rules. Based on the competition’s tiering, our analysis comprises three parts: 1) We examine conversational logs in HITL and hybrid solutions to trace decision making and responses to intermediate feedback. 2) For autonomous (agentic) solutions, 7

TABLE III: Solution autonomy levels across design factors.                      

> Design factor HITL Autonomous framework Hybrid a) Decision making Shared decision making with clear conver-sation logs. Agent determines next steps; no human decisions during runs. Shared decision making with explicit hand-offs.
> b) Degree of hu-man involvement
> Frequent interaction; humans execute tools and edit prompts. No prompt edits or manual commands dur-ing solving; humans only set up/monitor. Humans intervene selectively to unblock-/redirect; agent executes most steps.
> c) Engineering bar-rier
> Low: prompting, manual tool use. High: tool integration, orchestration, error handling. Medium: lighter agent build, human sup-port.
> d) Expertise re-quirement
> Accessible to diverse backgrounds; supports learning/reflection. Requires more engineering support or prior experience. Balances accessibility and automation; pre-serves human judgment.
> e) Typical problems Hard to attribute gains to LLM vs. human tool skill. Sensitive to tool/environment failures; de-pends on evidence collection and retries. Poor documentation obscures responsibility for errors and gains.
> f) Evaluation focus Human decision quality; prompting tech-nique. Agent design; evidence collection; plan-ning/execution; retries. Division of labor between human and agent.

TABLE IV: Summary of LLM-assisted CTF Competition (LLMAC) from 2023 to 2025. 

Event Regions Year #Teams #Participants #Submissions Autonomy 

LLMAC 2023 US-Canada / MENA / India 2023 17 33 8 HITL LLMAC 2024 US-Canada / MENA / India 2024 42 96 5 Agent LLMAC 2025 - In-class track US-Canada 2025 18 29 18 Agent LLMAC 2025 - Standard track US-Canada / MENA / India 2025 75 265 22 HITL/Agent/Hybrid LLMAC 2025 - Expert track US-Canada 2025 2 5 2 Agent 

TABLE V: Participation and submission statistics.                 

> Aspect Total US–Canada MENA India
> Enrollment 75 36 17 22 Participated 38 (51%) 22 (61%) 10 (59%) 6 (28%) Submission 22 (58%) 15 (68%) 4 (40%) 3 (50%)

we analyze agent trajectories and code to understand execution flow and observation mechanisms. 3) We use each team’s final presentation report, which summarizes workflow choices and key findings, to further interpret the logs and trajectories. In addition, we classify the architectures and common techniques of the agentic systems submitted. These data sources allow us to evaluate not only whether a challenge was solved, but also how participants and LLMs interacted during problem solving. We leverage these traceable records to analyze both out-comes and learning-relevant process evidence. To support RQ1, we first define evaluation metrics in Section V-A and describe dataset overview and material screening in Sec-tion V-B, then quantify autonomy-related performance gaps in Section V-D. To answer RQ3, we characterize human–AI collaboration behaviors in Section V-F, summarize beginner-facing design choices in Section V-I, and present prompt engineering techniques and agent architectures in Section V-J. 

A. Outcome and Evidence Quality Metrics 

Our analysis evaluates both challenge-solving outcomes and the interaction patterns that produced them. We define two classes of metrics accordingly: 1) performance metrics and 2) evidence quality metrics that ensure submissions are comparable and verifiable. For performance metrics, we use the number of solved challenges as the primary measure at the team level, reporting mean and median statistics for each autonomy level. We also compute solves per team by category when analyzing category-level performance differences. Because different autonomy levels require different sub-mission materials, we pair performance metrics with three evidence quality metrics: 1) Material completeness: the sub-mission includes all required materials for its autonomy level. 2) Traceable chain of reasoning →action →output: the provided materials contain verifiable intermediate steps that connect reasoning to concrete actions and to observable outputs sup-porting the final claim. Only submissions that pass both evidence gates are considered eligible for analysis. To com-pare performance across autonomy levels, we further restrict comparisons to teams working on the same challenge under the same flag verification procedure. 

B. Submission Dataset and Validity Screening Procedure 

We describe the dataset and screening process used to assess material completeness and traceable reasoning →action →output chains. Our analysis covers submissions from the CSAW LLM-assisted CTF competitions held from 2023 to 2025 across three regions: US-Canada, MENA, and India, with 154 teams in total. The challenge sets span multiple CTF categories including pwn, web, crypto, reverse engineering, forensics, and misc, following the format in Section IV. Table IV provides an event-level summary of the competitions, including autonomy levels, team and participant counts, and the number of teams with valid submissions. Each submission contains one or more documents recording the problem-solving workflow. Depending on autonomy level, these materials include human–AI conversation logs, autonomous agent trajectories, executable scripts or code repositories, and final presentation reports. For process analysis, we treat these submissions as evidence linking outcomes to intermediate reasoning, concrete actions, and observable outputs. 

C. Regional Participation and Valid Submission Statistics 

We measure engagement in two phases. Phase one captures participation rate (# teams that participated) / (# teams en-8

TABLE VI: 2025 Standard Track performance by autonomy level. Values denote the number of solves.                

> HITL (17 teams) Agent (2 teams) Hybrid (3 teams)
> Mean Med Min Max Mean Med Min Max Mean Med Min Max 2.7 2185.5 5.5 567.7 959

rolled). We define a team as “participated” if it showed com-petition engagement, such as submitting at least one transcript, including failed attempts, or posting at least one message in the official Discord server. Phase two captures submission rate = (# teams that solved at least one challenge with a valid submission) / (# participated). This two-phase view characterizes engagement and completion under competition constraints rather than focusing only on final outcomes. Table V shows participation and submission statistics for the 2025 Standard track across regions. Across all regions, 75 teams registered and 38 actually participated, yielding a 51% participation rate. Of these, 22 teams produced valid submissions, generating a 58% submission rate. This gap suggests that challenge difficulty, combined with variability in cybersecurity background and tool familiarity, limited timely submissions within the competition timeline. These rates vary by region. US–Canada and MENA show similar participation rates at 61% and 59% respectively, while India is lower at 28%. One possible explanation is that recruitment and onboarding differed across regions: US–Canada used more active promotion and offered an in-class track with instructor support, which may have made it easier for participants to get started. For submission rates, US–Canada leads at 68%, followed by India at 50% and MENA at 40%. 

D. Solve Performance Across Autonomy Levels 

We also analyze how solution autonomy levels influence participants’ ability to solve challenges with LLM assistance. Since event formats, participant backgrounds, and constraints differ across years and tracks, we conduct event-wise compar-isons to maintain fairness. Given the number of participants and diversity of competition formats, we take statistics from 2025 Standard track and evaluate performance using the number of challenges solved per team, denoted as #Solved. For each autonomy level, we report team-level summary statistics including mean, median, min, and max. Table VI reports #Solved for three autonomy levels: HITL with n=17 , Agent with n=2 , and Hybrid with n=3 . Both Agent and Hybrid approaches outperform HITL in the same setting. HITL teams solved 2.7 challenges on average, com-pared to 5.5 for Agent and 7.7 for Hybrid. The medians follow the same pattern, showing a substantial performance gap asso-ciated with higher-autonomy and more engineered workflows. This trend extends to outcomes: HITL teams obtains between 1 and 8 solves, Agent teams between 5 and 6, and Hybrid teams between 5 and 9, suggesting that higher-autonomy teams not only perform better on solve rate but also maintain a higher floor of task completion. The Agent and Hybrid groups are considerably smaller than the HITL group, and teams may differ in prior experience and engineering effort. These TABLE VII: Challenge level solve counts and within auton-omy level percentages by category and autonomy level.                                                                                  

> Challenge Cat. HITL (17 teams) Agent (2 teams) Hybrid (3 teams)
> obligatory-rsa cry 13 (76%) 2 (100%) 3 (100%) manual-distress-signal cry 8 (47%) 1 (50%) 2 (67%) oracle-down cry 4 (24%) 1 (50%) 2 (67%) echoes-of-DES-tiny cry 1 (6%) 1 (50%) 2 (67%)
> cry avg. 38% 63% 60%
> smolder-alexandria web 7 (41%) 1 (50%) 1 (33%) orion-override web 5 (29%) 2 (100%) 1 (33%) gradebook web 3 (18%) 0 (0%) 1 (33%)
> web avg. 29% 50% 33%
> whitespace-compiler rev 3 (18%) 0 (0%) 2 (67%) shadow-protocol rev 2 (12%) 0 (0%) 1 (33%) space-portal rev 1 (6%) 0 (0%) 1 (33%)
> rev avg. 12% 0% 44%
> mooneys-bookstore pwn 2 (12%) 2 (100%) 2 (67%) power-up pwn 2 (12%) 0 (0%) 2 (67%) arm-strong pwn 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) celestial-cafeteria pwn 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) colony-defense pwn 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
> pwn avg. 5% 20% 27%
> galaxy misc 3 (18%) 1 (50%) 3 (100%)
> misc avg. 18% 50% 100%

imbalances motivate the case studies in Section V-J, where we examine representative prompting techniques and agent designs to provide more detailed explanations for this gap. 

E. Challenge Level Solves by Autonomy and Categories 

We analyze the category level solve rates to understand these performance differences in more detail. Table VII reports solve counts and within-autonomy-level percentages for HITL, Agent, and Hybrid submissions in the 2025 Standard track. Overall, higher-autonomy workflows tend to achieve higher solve rates, though the gap varies across challenge types. Large gaps appear in categories driven by iterative explo-ration and tool interaction. In pwn, HITL teams achieve a 5% average solve rate, versus 20% for Agent and 27% for Hybrid. These challenges often require complex debugging, environment interaction, and verification loops that automated workflows can execute more systematically. Misc shows the strongest difference: HITL reaches 18%, Agent 50%, and Hybrid 100%. Although this result is based on a few misc challenges, suggesting that agentic or hybrid workflows are well-suited to open-ended tasks that require fast trial-and-error and rapid conversion of observations into concrete steps. In contrast, categories involving more structured reasoning or deeper program understanding show smaller differences. 1) Crypto challenges have consistently high solve rates across groups, with HITL at 38%, Agent at 63%, and Hybrid at 60%, likely because these challenges follow well-structured algorithmic solution paths where all autonomy modes can connect intermediate reasoning to concrete computations and correctness verification. 2) For web, Agent teams improve over HITL at 50% versus 29%, but Hybrid does not consistently exceed Agent at 33%, suggesting that human intervention does not automatically improve success when automation already captures the core request-response iteration loop. 3) Reverse engineering challenges are difficult and sensitive to workflow design: HITL averages 12%, Agent achieves 0% in this dataset, while Hybrid reaches 44%, indicating that interpreting 9

TABLE VIII: Autonomy tier vs. interaction style in Standard Track HITL logs.                   

> Interaction Style Autonomy Tier Solution Seeker Strategic Collaborator Technical Partner Total
> AI-Dependent 29 0029 (60.4%) AI-Assisted 10 0111 (22.9%) Collaborative 0527 (14.6%) Independent 0101 (2.1%)

unfamiliar binaries and reconstructing control flow may ben-efit from targeted human guidance plus selective automation. Overall, these results indicate that challenge category is a key factor shaping the performance gap between autonomy modes. When challenges require frequent iteration and tool execution, Agent and Hybrid teams have clear benefits. When challenges rely on algorithmic reasoning or deep program understanding, gains are smaller and depend on how human judgment and automation are combined than on autonomy alone. 

F. Learning-Oriented Analysis of HITL Interaction Logs 

To complement the outcome-level comparisons above, we next examine HITL interaction logs from the standard track to inform learning-oriented competition design. Using GPT-5.2 as an LLM-as-a-judge, we assign structured labels to each human–AI collaboration dialogue to identify interaction pat-terns and failure modes that can undermine learning objectives when LLM assistance is permitted. To verify the judge outputs, two human reviewers jointly inspected a subset of 15 labeled dialogues. The human review agreed with the LLM labels on 12 of the 15 dialogues, 80.0% simple agreement at the dialogue level, with the three disagreements concentrated in borderline cases involving adjacent autonomy or interaction-style categories. The judge assigns four label dimensions: 1) Human Autonomy Tiers, including AI-Dependent, AI-Assisted, Collaborative, and Independent; 2) Interaction Styles, including Solution Seeker, Strategic Collaborator, and Tech-nical Partner; 3) Human Interaction Proficiency, classifying prompting techniques as Excellent, Good, or Poor; and 4) Behavioral Signals, covering context augmentation, hypothesis testing, validation, and blind iteration. These labeled patterns inform the design recommendations we propose for autonomy-aware CTF competitions. Table VIII summarizes the relationship between autonomy tier and interaction style across the HITL logs. Here, autonomy tiers reflect how much control the human retains over vulner-ability identification and solution planning: AI-Dependent de-notes model-led problem solving, AI-Assisted denotes human-directed but model-reliant execution, Collaborative denotes balanced co-reasoning, and Independent denotes human-led planning with the model used mainly for implementation. Most cases were labeled AI-Dependent, accounting for 29 of 48 dialogues at 60.4%, and all of these exhibit Solution Seeker interaction style, indicating that participants tend to treat the LLM as an answer-generation system and mainly request next steps or complete solutions. In contrast, Collaborative cases are rare at 7 of 48 or 14.6% and instead show Strategic Collabora-tor or Technical Partner styles, reflecting more human-led task TABLE IX: LLM used in Standard Track HITL submissions.         

> AI / Platform (model family) Share of teams (%)
> Claude (incl. Sonnet 4.5, Claude 3.5 Sonnet) 57.9 GPT (incl. GPT-4/4o/5, GPT-5 Codex) 36.8 Gemini (incl. Gemini 2.5 Pro) 15.8 Cursor AI 21.1 GitHub Copilot 10.5 xAI (incl. Grok 4, Grok 4 Fast) 5.3 Kiro AI 5.3

decomposition and reasoning validation. AI-Assisted cases, 11 of 48 at 22.9%, remain mostly Solution Seeker but begin to exhibit Technical Partner behavior, suggesting a transitional mode where participants provide direction and context while still relying on the LLM for subsequent execution. Independent cases are extremely rare at 1 of 48 or 2.1% and appear as Strategic Collaborator, indicating the human fully drives decomposition while using the LLM in a controlled manner. Overall, interaction style is tightly connected with autonomy tier: higher-autonomy collaboration appears only when par-ticipants actively guide, verify, and refine the LLM’s actions, rather than emerging automatically from access alone. Interaction rounds also differ across tiers. AI-Dependent interactions are typically brief at around 1.79 rounds, while AI-Assisted cases average 8.09 rounds and Collaborative cases average 10.29 rounds. This pattern indicates that higher-autonomy dialogues follow longer iterative execution and ver-ification cycles rather than one-time solution seeking. Among behavioral signals, context augmentation was common at 34 of 48, and blind iteration was also frequent at 26 of 48, especially in AI-Dependent logs. Behaviors that actively control the problem-solving process, including validation at 19 of 48 and task decomposition at 18 of 48, were less frequent overall but concentrated in AI-Assisted and Collaborative interactions, where hypothesis testing also appeared more often. To provide additional context, we summarize the LLMs used in standard-track HITL submissions. Table IX reports, for each model family f , the share of HITL teams whose logs mention at least one model from that family: 

pf = #{HITL teams mentioning family f }

#{HITL teams } × 100% .

Because a team can mention multiple model families across challenges, the sum P 

> f

pf can exceed 100% . Claude models were the most frequently used, followed by GPT models, and many teams also employed IDE-integrated tools such as Cursor[74] and GitHub Copilot[75]. These results indicate that simply providing access to LLMs does not ensure active learner involvement. Most HITL in-teractions are LLM-driven; only a few exhibit collaborative behaviors where learners actively decompose tasks and vali-date hypotheses. We translate these findings into explicit sub-mission requirements and scoring criteria. The rubric rewards process quality by awarding points for 1) reproducible reason-ing supported by intermediate steps, 2) systematic debugging and error analysis, and 3) clear decision points that justify why a particular exploitation path or tool choice was taken. In addition, bonus credit is awarded for creative approaches and effective agent workflows with verifiable agent trajectories 10 

TABLE X: LLM used in year 2023 and 2024 submissions.       

> AI / Platform (model family) 2023 (%) 2024 (%)
> GPT (incl. GPT-4/4o) 100 80 Claude (incl. Claude 3.5 Sonnet) 040

and intermediate results. Together, these design choices better align competition evaluation with educational goals. 

G. Model and Tool Usage Across Competition Years 

Table X summarizes the LLM platforms used in 2023 and 2024 submissions. As with Table IX, the values report the percentage of teams whose writeups mention each model family, and totals can exceed 100% because teams often used multiple models across challenges. In 2023, all teams used GPT models at 100%, while Claude was not reported. By 2024, GPT remained widely used at 80%, but Claude emerged as an additional option at 40%, suggesting a shift from single-platform reliance toward multi-model adoption. Comparing with the 2025 results in Table IX, this trend continues: Claude becomes the most frequently used model family at 57.9% while GPT remains prominent at 36.8%. The 2025 submissions also report a broader set of model families and IDE-integrated assistants such as Cursor[74] and GitHub Copilot[75], indicating that teams increasingly combine multiple tools and workflows. These shifts underscore the importance of traceable submissions: when model and tool usage varies across and within teams, process records help interpret not only solve outcomes but also how participants collaborate with LLMs under different configurations. 

H. Submission Validity and Common Reasons for Invalidation 

Motivated by the need for traceable submissions, we next examine submission validity and common reasons for inval-idation. Over the competition years, we identified 8 invalid submissions in total, with 2 in 2024 and 6 in 2025. While many submissions document a reproducible solving process, we also observe a recurring invalid pattern in which the submitted materials contain reasonable intermediate exploitation steps but lack a traceable final step linking computation to the reported flag. The crypto challenge “obligatory-rsa” provides a representative example. The transcript shown in Figure 6 in-cludes several standard intermediate steps: computing a shared prime factor using the Greatest Common Divisor algorithm, factoring the RSA moduli, and verifying the factorization. These steps make the submission appear to be a complete solving workflow and can therefore be misleading. However, in the final step the script does not derive the flag through computation but instead prints a hard-coded flag string: 

print(f"\n[+] FLAG: csawctf{...}") 

This pattern prevents independent verification of the final flag. Even if the earlier steps are reasonable, a hard-coded flag introduces an unverifiable jump from reasoning to the final an-swer. Judges cannot determine whether the flag was produced through the documented workflow or obtained from external resources such as public writeups. We treat such submissions as non-traceable and exclude them, since our goal is to ground findings in reproducible reasoning →action →output chains.                                                                              

> Agent
> Let me test if the keys share acommon factor
> Code
> p_common =gcd(n1, n2)
> Tool / Environment output
> [+] VULNERABLE! Common factor found [+] p=9925116...194413
> Agent
> Both keys share acommon prime p... Ican now factor both moduli and verify the private exponents.
> Code
> q1 =n1 // p_common; q2 =n2 // p_common assert p_common *q1 == n1; assert p_common * q2 == n2 [+] Factorization verified! assert (d1*e-1) %phi1 == 0; assert (d2*e-1) % phi2 == 0 [+] Private exponents verified!
> Code (final step)
> print(f"\n[+] FLAG: csawctf{wH04m1_70d3Ny...}")
> Agent
> Running the exploit script...
> Tool / Environment output
> [+] Common prime found [+] Private exponents verified! [+] FLAG: csawctf{wH04m1_70d3Ny...}

Fig. 6: Representative invalid submission pattern: final flag is hard-coded rather than derived from computation. A second invalid pattern involves premature human in-tervention (Figure 7), where users inject key solving steps instead of allowing the agent to operate autonomously. In the “lost pyramid” challenge, for example, a user prompt directly identified the exploitation path—SSTI and JWT vulnerabili-ties—preempting the agent’s discovery process. The injection even specified technical execution details, such as exploiting PyJWT by reusing the PUBLICKEY without truncation. Such prompts go beyond formatting changes: they directly supply manual created high-level solution and step-level guid-ance that shape the agent’s subsequent search space, tool usage, and solving path. As a result, the traces no longer reflect the agent’s own reasoning and planning capabilities but may instead derive from externally provided human knowledge. This violates the intended constraints of the autonomous setting, where human involvement is limited to system design before execution, including agent architecture and prompting templates, and to monitoring during runtime. Prompt revisions based on solving hints are not permitted. Therefore, even when these runs produce the correct flag, we treat them as invalid for process analysis because it is unclear which steps were discovered by the agent and which were externally provided, making comparison of agent behavior unreliable. 

I. Agent Architecture Design Choices in the In-Class Track 

To better understand how beginners use LLMs in a CTF competition, we analyze all submissions from the in-class track. This track is designed to encourage building autonomous agent frameworks and therefore provides a focused view of practical agent design choices. For each team, we labeled the agent architecture that best described the overall control flow. Table XI highlights a lack of architectural diversity: 17 out of 18 teams (94.4%) opted for a basic single-agent loop, while only one team implemented a planner-executor multi-agent 11                          

> Human (injected hint prompt)
> -SSTI...Flask...render_template_string... -PyJWT...trick JWT decoder into symmetric algorithm... -Use PUBLICKEY without truncation...
> Agent
> $curl -s -X POST -d "name={{PUBLICKEY}}" http://web.chal.csaw.io:8050/scarab_room
> Tool / Environment output
> ...Welcome to the Scarab Room, ’ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIPIeM72N...’
> Agent
> token =jwt.encode(payload, "ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIPIeM72N...", algorithm="HS256")

Fig. 7: Invalid autonomous submission: human hints guide the agent to extract and reuse a secret from tool output. TABLE XI: In-class Track: architecture types and techniques.               

> Category Teams Percentage (%)
> Architecture
> Basic single agent grounded loop 17 94.4 Planner-Executor multi-agent 15.6
> Techniques
> Engineering robustness 18 100.0 Safety guardrails 14 77.8 Prompt structured workflow 10 55.6 Memory management 738.9

design. Because architectural choices concentrate in these two patterns, differences among teams are better explained by technique-level augmentations. Table XI highlights four technique families. Engineering robustness is universal across all 18 teams, typically achieved through strict action formats, loop detection, and retry logic to prevent the agent from getting stuck. Safety guardrails are also common at 14 of 18 or 77.8%, including blocking direct flag reads and ensuring that a “finish” decision is supported by traceable execution evidence. Prompt-structured workflows appear in over half of the submissions at 10 of 18 or 55.6%, adding cybersecurity checklists or evidence-gated decision rules to the system prompt to reduce hallucination-driven exploration and encour-age systematic diagnosis before exploitation. Finally, memory management is adopted by a substantial minority at 7 of 18 or 38.9%, using sliding windows, periodic summaries, or notes to mitigate token limits and preserve important state across long runs. While particularly helpful for planner–executor designs, memory management can also stabilize single-agent loops. These results suggest that in an educational in-class setting the dominant pattern is a single-agent grounded loop, and the most meaningful differentiation arises from technique augmentations rather than complex multi-agent architectures. This implies that in-class learning is driven less by architec-tural novelty and more by building a reliable, rule-following workflow that participants can iterate on and debug. 

J. Technical Case Study 

In this section, we report case studies along two dimen-sions: HITL interactions and agent workflows, identifying the challenge, category, and track for each case. The submission materials reveal how LLMs support offensive security problem                                                                        

> Human (reusable prompt template)
> Read the code structure and snippet, list likely vulnerability types, and provide concrete steps to capture the flag via vulnerable parts.
> LLM (multiple possible paths)
> Likely vulnerabilities: -Decrypt-then-verify ordering => CBC padding oracle signal -Length/exception differences and timing leakage -Exposed secret key in repository (if available) Two concrete paths: Option A(fast): If repo/key is available, decrypt locally using the provided SECRET_KEY... Option B(fallback): If key is not available, use a padding-oracle style recovery ...
> Human (operator decision)
> Pick Option Aunder competition constraints; implement and verify the decryption with local scripts and tools.

Fig. 8: Code driven exploitation prompt. solving across skill levels: beginners benefit from conceptual support, standard participants gain assistance in debugging and reasoning, and experts use LLMs to improve efficiency and reflect on decisions. Together, the cases illustrate design-relevant patterns for LLM-assisted CTF learning settings. 

1) Human-in-the-loop (HITL) case 1 – Code-driven ex-ploitation prompting: We illustrate team P1’s HITL approach using two standard-track challenges, “crypto/oracle-down” 

and “web/onion-override” [76]. Shown in Fig. 8, rather than requesting the flag directly, they use a reusable template, asking the LLM to 1) read the README and relevant code and 2) list the likely vulnerability types. In response, the LLM enumerates multiple plausible exploitation paths with brief justifications, making the output easier for a human to follow and verify. For “oracle-down” , the LLM explains that the key problem is that two moduli share a prime factor recoverable by computing the Greatest Common Divisor, which the team then validates with scripts. For “onion-override” , the LLM identifies a specific logic mistake: when parameters become an array the code checks only the last value and fails to verify 

req.session.isAdmin , the team confirms through controlled requests. Across both challenges, the prompt reliably yields alternative solution paths under different assumptions, and the team selects the most feasible one. P1 maintains a clear labor division: the LLM provides reasoning and planning while humans execute and verify, reducing risk from model errors and improving reuse across challenges. 

2) Human-in-the-loop (HITL) case 2 – Structured promot-ing with constraints, format, and single step iteration: Fig. 9 shows team P3’s HITL submission on the “misc/galaxy” 

challenge. The key of this challenge 1) states strict constraints, 2) forces a fixed three-part reply format, and 3) enforces a single-step loop where output depends on the previous observed result. First, P3 strict constraints upfront. The prompt forbids editing files or adding helper files, and highlights that the substitution mapping is random each run. This prevents the LLM from suggesting shortcut-style workarounds and keeps the workflow inside the challenge rules. Second, the three-section format forces discipline. The human requires exactly: 1) a one-sentence SUMMARY, 2) two ranked HYPOTHESES, 12 

and 3) one exact NEXT INPUT, plus one sentence explaining what output to expect and what it means. This makes every turn easy to verify and continue. P3 enforces a single-step loop that builds on the last result. After the human reports that dd produced a blank line, they explicitly ask the model to continue with the same format and only one next step. The LLM uses that new fact to propose the next short ciphertext, 

dad , to learn one more letter mapping. 

3) Agent case 1 – A Modular Multi-Agent Architecture with Human-Inspired Workflows: We observe agent systems from the expert track whose system prompts implement procedural workflows modeled after experienced CTF solvers, as shown in Figure 10. For each challenge category, the prompt specifies a sequence of steps that the agent must progress through before expanding the search space. Only after completing these steps without finding the correct flag does the agent autonomously call additional tools. This design aligns model reasoning with expert experience and reduces uncontrolled exploration, improving traceability of the reasoning-action-outcome chain. The system combines 1) a human-inspired procedural prompt that enforces category-specific checklists and 2) a modular multi-agent architecture that isolates functions into specialized subagents to reduce hallucination propagation. The workflow begins with an Initial Agent that parses challenge metadata, classifies the challenge into predefined categories, and passes it to the corresponding Category Manager Agent. Each manager calls specialized subagents with dedicated prompts and tools, keeping intermediate steps context-specific. For example, the reversing manager coordinates an IDA[77] decompilation agent, a binary analysis agent, and a debugger agent. A script critic agent evaluates if scripts produced by the script develop-ment agent align with the challenge needs. Intermediate results are stored and retrieved by an RAG storage agent for later reference without relying on external knowledge bases. The                                                                                                                   

> Human (important constraints)
> Important constraints: do NOT ask me to modify the file or add helper files;...generates anew random substitution mapping every run.
> Human (required structured format)
> Reply in exactly three short sections (no extra prose): 1) SUMMARY -one sentence describing the vulnerability/attack surface. 2) HYPOTHESES -two short ranked hypotheses for how to get the flag. 3) NEXT INPUT -one exact short string...
> LLM (follows format)
> SUMMARY -...recover the cipher mapping... HYPOTHESES -(1) Find which ciphertext character... (2) If apostrophe mapping fails, next find... NEXT INPUT -qq Expected output: if the program prints an empty line...
> Human (single step continuation)
> Give me the next single step following the same structured style (SUMMARY, HYPOTHESES, NEXT INPUT)...
> LLM (proposes next single step)
> SUMMARY -With ddecoding to apostrophe... HYPOTHESES -(1) Probe letters for l,e,n... (2) Probe letters for s,p,i,r,a... NEXT INPUT -dad Expected output: one character telling us what...

Fig. 9: HITL with clear constraints, fixed structure, and single-step iteration. 

Fig. 10: Multi-agent architecture design from Expert Track. manager integrates subagent outputs to decide the next step, and the system supports cross-category reuse when a subagent is needed beyond its primary category. 

4) Agent case 2 – In-class agent design patterns: In Ta-ble XI, we structure Case A2 using a two layer taxonomy that separates agent architecture from techniques. In the single-agent grounded loop in Figure 11a, a single controller agent receives challenge metadata and configuration, proposes an action plan, calls local tools such as shell, decompiler, and debugger, and integrates tool outputs back into its context to refine subsequent actions. This architecture tightly couples planning, execution, and interpretation of tool feedback in a single agent, making it straightforward to implement and broadly applicable across challenges. In the planner-executor multi-agent architecture shown in Figure 11b, responsibilities are separated: a planner maintains persistent context and decomposes the task into subtasks, while an executor runs commands and produces task outputs. A summarization step feeds results back to the planner, closing a plan → delegate →

execute → summarize → re-plan loop. This separation reduces context overload and keeps the strategy on track. But it entails design overhead that may explain its low adoption. VI. R EFLECTIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

This study reflects an initial step toward scalable, learning-oriented LLM-assisted CTF competitions, with opportunities for gradual improvement in future iterations. First, the level of autonomy is likely correlated with prior security experi-ence, engineering capacity, and familiarity with LLM-based systems, introducing potential selection bias. Therefore, higher completion rates among more autonomous teams should not be interpreted as a causal effect of autonomy alone. Second, team counts are imbalanced across autonomy levels and tracks, which limits statistical comparability and makes some patterns sensitive to a few high-performing submissions. Third, our evidence-based analysis improves traceability and integrity, and it also underscores the need for clearer standards for documenting reasoning, tool use, and intermediate validation. However, trace completeness is not equivalent to solution quality or learning outcomes. Future work will connect trace-derived behaviors to direct learning measurements through pre- and post-assessments. 13 

(a) Single agent grounded loop architecture. 

(b) Planner-Executor multi-agent architecture. 

Fig. 11: In-class Track agent architecture workflows. We plan to use controlled within team comparisons between human-in-the-loop and agent runs to separate autonomy effects from prior expertise and engineering investment. We also plan to refine category-specific evaluation criteria for challenges that rely heavily on interpretation or unstructured evidence, and to strengthen reproducibility guidelines by specifying minimum requirements for trace completeness and reporting. More broadly, the track structure, evidence requirements, and autonomy taxonomy are designed to be portable to other AI-assisted cybersecurity competitions and may also inform broader educational assessments beyond CTFs. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We present a scalable and learning-oriented design for running LLM-assisted CTFs in a way that remains fair for par-ticipants with diverse backgrounds. We structure the CTFs into tracks that align with the teams’ experience, and we introduce an explicit autonomy taxonomy that separates human-guided usage from autonomous agent workflows. To make results auditable and comparable, we require traceability through complete conversation logs, agent execution trajectories, and released agent code, allowing both outcomes and processes to be examined. Using CTF data collected across regions, we observe that teams operating at higher autonomy levels achieve higher CTF completion rates, and this pattern is most visible on challenges where rapid iteration, tool interaction, and repeated verification are central to progress. The track-based structure, autonomy taxonomy, and traceability requirements also advance educational goals by emphasizing explainable problem solving, intermediate validation, and reflective hu-man–AI collaboration rather than final outcomes alone. More broadly, the framework and resulting dataset provide a prac-tical foundation for the community to study how autonomy shapes performance and problem solving, design fair and learning-oriented LLM-assisted cybersecurity competitions for diverse participants, and refine prompt engineering and agent architecture choices for effective CTF solving. REFERENCES [1] M. Udeshi et al. , “D-cipher: Dynamic collaborative intelligent agents with planning and heterogeneous execution for enhanced reasoning in offensive security,” arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2502, 2025. [2] B. Saha and S. K. Shukla, “Malgen: A generative agent framework for modeling malicious software in cybersecurity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07586 , 2025. [3] Y. Dong, X. Jiang, J. Qian, T. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Jin, and G. Li, “A survey on code generation with llm-based agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00083 , 2025. [4] P. Charan et al. , “From text to mitre techniques: Exploring the malicious use of large language models for generating cyber attack payloads,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15336 , 2023. [5] W. Peng, L. Ye, X. Du, H. Zhang, D. Zhan, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, and C. Zhang, “Pwngpt: Automatic exploit generation based on large language models,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,2025, pp. 11 481–11 494. [6] P. Denny, D. H. Smith IV, M. Fowler, J. Prather, B. A. Becker, and J. Leinonen, “Explaining code with a purpose: An integrated approach for developing code comprehension and prompting skills,” in Proceed-ings of the 2024 on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education V. 1 , 2024, pp. 283–289. [7] B. Saha, N. Rani, and S. K. Shukla, “Malaware: Automating the comprehension of malicious software behaviours using large language models (llms),” in 2025 IEEE/ACM 22nd International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 169–173. [8] Z. Ji et al. , “Measuring and augmenting large language models for solving capture-the-flag challenges,” in Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2025, pp. 603–617. [9] M. Shao et al. , “An empirical evaluation of llms for solving offensive security challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11814 , 2024. [10] T. Abramovich et al. , “Enigma: Interactive tools substantially assist lm agents in finding security vulnerabilities,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .[11] M. Shao et al. , “Nyu ctf bench: A scalable open-source benchmark dataset for evaluating llms in offensive security,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 57 472–57 498, 2024, project page: https://nyu-llm-ctf.github.io/csaw_llmac.html. [12] A. K. Zhang et al. , “Cybench: A framework for evaluating cyber-security capabilities and risks of language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08926 , 2024. [13] M. Shao et al. , “Towards effective offensive security llm agents: Hy-perparameter tuning, llm as a judge, and a lightweight ctf benchmark,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05674 , 2025. [14] G. Deng et al. , “ {PentestGPT }: Evaluating and harnessing large lan-guage models for automated penetration testing,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) , 2024, pp. 847–864. [15] N. Rani et al. , “Cyberexplorer: Benchmarking llm offensive security capabilities in a real-world attacking simulation environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08023 , 2026. [16] S. Wan et al. , “Cyberseceval 3: Advancing the evaluation of cyberse-curity risks and capabilities in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01605 , 2024. [17] R. Turtayev et al. , “Hacking ctfs with plain agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02776 , 2024. [18] “Def con,” https://defcon.org, 2024, accessed: 2025-12-14. [19] V. Švábensk` y et al. , “Cybersecurity knowledge and skills taught in capture the flag challenges,” Computers & Security , vol. 102, p. 102154, 2021. 14 

[20] “picoctf: CMU cybersecurity competition,” https://picoctf.org/, Carnegie Mellon University CyLab, 2025, accessed: 2025-12-14. [21] “Ructf,” https://ructf.org/, HackerDom, 2021, accessed: 2025-12-14. [22] “ictf: The international capture the flag competition,” https://ictf.cs.ucsb. edu/, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2024, accessed: 2025-12-14. [23] “Ctfd: The easiest capture the flag platform,” https://ctfd.io/, CTFd, 2024, accessed: 2025-12-14. [24] “Htb capture the flag platform,” https://www.hackthebox.com/ capture-the-flag, Hack The Box, 2024, accessed: 2025-12-14. [25] K. Leune and S. J. Petrilli Jr, “Using capture-the-flag to enhance the effectiveness of cybersecurity education,” in Proceedings of the 18th annual conference on information technology education , 2017, pp. 47– 52. [26] J. Vykopal et al. , “Benefits and pitfalls of using capture the flag games in university courses,” in Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical symposium on computer science education , 2020, pp. 752–758. [27] C. Nelson et al. , “Pwn the learning curve: Education-first ctf challenges,” in Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , 2024, pp. 937–943. [28] A. Vaswani et al. , “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [29] M. Shao et al. , “Survey of different large language model architectures: Trends, benchmarks, and challenges,” IEEE access , vol. 12, pp. 188 664– 188 706, 2024. [30] T. Brown et al. , “Language models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020. [31] L. Ouyang et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 35, pp. 27 730–27 744, 2022. [32] R. Bommasani, “On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021. [33] S. Bubeck et al. , “Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early exper-iments with gpt-4,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 , 2023. [34] J. Achiam et al. , “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [35] J. Bai et al. , “Qwen technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 ,2023. [36] Anthropic, “The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku,” https: //www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-family, 2024, model card and tech-nical report for the Claude 3 family. [37] W. X. Zhao et al. , “A survey of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 , vol. 1, no. 2, 2023. [38] D. Zan et al. , “Large language models meet nl2code: A survey,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2023, pp. 7443– 7464. [39] R. Taylor et al. , “Galactica: A large language model for science,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085 , 2022. [40] S. Wu et al. , “Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564 , 2023. [41] M. Chen, “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. [42] M. R. Tapader et al. , “Code refactoring with llm: A comprehensive evaluation with few-shot settings,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21788 ,2025. [43] A. Taylor et al. , “dcc–help: Transforming the role of the compiler by generating context-aware error explanations with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , 2024, pp. 1314–1320. [44] C. E. Jimenez et al. , “Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 , 2023. [45] J. Yang et al. , “Intercode: Standardizing and benchmarking interactive coding with execution feedback,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 23 826–23 854, 2023. [46] Z. Wang et al. , “Netdetox: Adversarial and efficient evasion of hardware-security gnns via rl-llm orchestration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00119 ,2025. [47] C. Chen et al. , “Elfuzz: Efficient input generation via llm-driven synthesis over fuzzer space,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10323 , 2025. [48] H. Xi et al. , “From trace to line: Llm agent for real-world oss vulnerability localization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02389 , 2025. [49] W. Wang et al. , “Vulnrepaireval: An exploit-based evaluation framework for assessing large language model vulnerability repair capabilities,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.03331 , 2025. [50] R. Deng et al. , “Does chatgpt enhance student learning? a systematic review and meta-analysis of experimental studies,” Computers & Edu-cation , vol. 227, p. 105224, 2025. [51] L. Huang et al. , “A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Transac-tions on Information Systems , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 1–55, 2025. [52] N. Abdallah et al. , “Systematic review of chatgpt in higher education: Navigating impact on learning, wellbeing, and collaboration,” Social Sciences & Humanities Open , vol. 12, p. 101866, 2025. [53] W. Holmes et al. , Guidance for generative AI in education and research .Unesco Publishing, 2023. [54] P. Oli et al. , “Can llms identify gaps and misconceptions in students’ code explanations?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10365 , 2024. [55] L. Gao et al. , “Fine-tuned large language model for visualization system: A study on self-regulated learning in education,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 514–524, 2024. [56] D. T. T. Mai et al. , “The use of chatgpt in teaching and learning: a systematic review through swot analysis approach,” in Frontiers in Education , vol. 9. Frontiers Media SA, 2024, p. 1328769. [57] Z. Sheng et al. , “All you need is a fuzzing brain: An llm-powered system for automated vulnerability detection and patching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07225 , 2025. [58] AI Cyber Challenge, “Aixcc final competition procedures and scoring guide,” https://aicyberchallenge.com/storage/2025/06/ AFC-Procedures-and-Scoring-Guide-Version-2_0-_20250606.pdf, Jun. 2025, version 2.0, accessed 2026-03-15. [59] “Csaw: Cybersecurity games and conference,” https://www.csaw.io/, accessed: 2025-12-29. [60] Hack The Box, “AI vs Human: CTF results show AI agents can rival top hackers,” Blog post, Apr. 2025, accessed: 2025-12-21. [Online]. Available: https://www.hackthebox.com/blog/ ai-vs-human-ctf-hack-the-box-results [61] S. Schulhoff et al. , “Ignore this title and hackaprompt: Exposing systemic vulnerabilities of llms through a global prompt hacking com-petition,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2023, pp. 4945–4977. [62] Humane Intelligence, “AI Village Defcon Dataset (DEFCON 31 Generative AI Red Teaming),” GitHub repository, https://github.com/ humane-intelligence/ai_village_defcon_grt_data, 2024, accessed: 2025-12-19. [63] W. Tann et al. , “Using large language models for cybersecurity capture-the-flag challenges and certification questions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10443 , 2023. [64] H. Pieterse, “Friend or foe–the impact of chatgpt on capture the flag competitions,” in International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security . Academic Conferences International Limited, 2024, pp. 268– 276. [65] I. Bakker et al. , “Autonomous penetration testing: Solving capture-the-flag challenges with llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01054 , 2025. [66] J. Yang et al. , “Language agents as hackers: Evaluating cybersecu-rity skills with capture the flag,” in Multi-Agent Security Workshop@ NeurIPS’23 , 2023. [67] T. Y. Zhuo et al. , “Training language model agents to find vulnerabilities with ctf-dojo,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18370 , 2025. [68] L. Muzsai et al. , “Hacksynth: Llm agent and evaluation framework for autonomous penetration testing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01778 ,2024. [69] M. Shao et al. , “Craken: Cybersecurity llm agent with knowledge-based execution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17107 , 2025. [70] T. Y. Zhuo et al. , “Cyber-zero: Training cybersecurity agents without runtime,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00910 , 2025. [71] L. Muzsai et al. , “Improving llm agents with reinforcement learning on cryptographic ctf challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02048 , 2025. [72] T. Tang et al. , “Understanding human-ai collaboration in cybersecurity competitions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20446 , 2026. [73] GitHub, “GitHub Classroom,” https://classroom.github.com/, official website, accessed March 9, 2026. [74] Anysphere, Inc., “Cursor,” [Online]. Available: https://www.cursor.com/, accessed: 2026-03-03. [75] GitHub, Inc., “GitHub Copilot,” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ features/copilot, accessed: 2026-03-03. [76] NYU-LLM-CTF, “CSAW25_LLMAC_DB,” https://github.com/ NYU-LLM-CTF/CSAW25_LLMAC_DB/tree/main, 2025, gitHub repository, accessed March 9, 2026. [77] Hex-Rays SA, “IDA Pro: Disassembler, Decompiler & Debugger,” [Online]. Available: https://hex-rays.com/ida-pro, accessed: 2026-03-03.