Title: Can a Robot Walk the Robotic Dog: Triple-Zero Collaborative Navigation for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21723v2

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:44:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Can a Robot Walk the Robotic Dog: Triple-Zero Collaborative Navigation for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems 

Yaxuan Wang †1, Yifan Xiang †2 Ke Li 3, Xun Zhang 2, Bowen Ye 2,Zhuochen Fan 4,2, Fei Wei 5 and Tong Yang ∗2

Abstract — We present Triple Zero Path Planning (TZPP), a collaborative framework for heterogeneous multi-robot systems that requires zero training, zero prior knowledge, and zero simulation. TZPP employs a coordinator–explorer architecture: a humanoid robot handles task coordination, while a quadruped robot explores and identifies feasible paths using guidance from a multimodal large language model. We implement TZPP on Unitree G1 and Go2 robots and evaluate it across diverse indoor and outdoor environments, including obstacle-rich and landmark-sparse settings. Experiments show that TZPP achieves robust, human-comparable efficiency and strong adaptability to unseen scenarios. By eliminating reliance on training and simulation, TZPP offers a practical path toward real-world deployment of heterogeneous robot cooperation. Our code and video are provided at: https://github.com/triple-zeropp/Triple-zero-robot-agent. 

I. INTRODUCTION Multi-robot systems (MRS) have shown significant po-tential in applications ranging from logistics to disaster response. In particular, heterogeneous MRS can leverage the complementary strengths of different platforms (e.g., the mobility of quadrupeds and the manipulation capabilities of humanoids) to perform complex tasks. Among these tasks, path planning is a key challenge for such collaboration. Currently, an emerging direction to address this problem is multi-robot collaboration and path planning based on large language models (LLMs) [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Existing studies on multi-agent collaborative path plan-ning mainly fall into three categories: (1) learning-based approaches that rely on large-scale training or fine-tuning (e.g., Graph-Based [2], TaskExp [6]), which can tackle novel problems in unfamiliar environments to some extent but incur high training and deployment costs; (2) methods dependent on prior maps or scene modeling (e.g., ZeroCAP [7], COHERENT [8]), which perform well in known en-vironments but tend to generalize poorly and fail in real, dynamic settings; and (3) simulation-driven approaches (e.g.,     

> 1Yuanpei College, Peking University
> 2School of Computer Science, Peking University
> 3School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-munications
> 4Pengcheng Laboratory
> 5Beijing Jinruyi Large Model Technology Co., Ltd.
> ∗Corresponding author: Tong Yang. Email: yangtong@pku.edu.cn.
> †These authors contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2024YFB2906603, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 62372009). The authors would like to thank Beijing Jinruyi Large Model Technology Co., Ltd. for their strong support and close collaboration.The authors also thank Yuanpei College, Peking University, for its support. TABLE I COMPARISON AGAINST THE TRIPLE ZERO CRITERIA

Method No Training No Prior Knowledge No Simulation Ours √ √ √

ZeroCAP [7] √ × ×

TaskExp [6] × √ ×

SIGMA [9] × × ×

Hybrid [10] √ × √

COHERENT [8] √ × √

Graph-Based [2] × × ×

MIM [11] √ × √

SIGMA [9], Graph-Based [2]), which train and validate mainly in virtual environments and thus heavily depend on the quality of the simulation–if there is a large gap or poor fidelity between simulation and reality, the real-world performance can be severely affected. A summary of how representative prior works align with the three aforemen-tioned criteria is provided in Table I. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a novel paradigm for multi-robot path planning—Triple Zero Path Planning (TZPP)—designed to support heterogeneous agents in autonomously exploring and reaching targets in unknown, complex environments. Taking the collaboration between a humanoid agent and a quadruped agent as an example, we construct a coordinator-explorer architecture: the humanoid handles high-level task coordination and navigation, while the quadruped undertakes environment exploration and fea-sible path identification. We deploy this framework in real-world environments, where the G1-Go2 multi-agent system achieves human-level collaborative efficiency across multiple tasks, stably accomplishing complex navigation missions and effectively emulating human exploration and decision-making behaviors. These results validate the soundness and innovation of the paradigm’s architecture and mechanisms. Overall, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

We propose the first heterogeneous agent path planning paradigm satisfying the “Triple Zero” constraints—zero training, zero prior knowledge, and zero simulation dependency. Without additional training or prior condi-tions, the approach enables multi-robot systems to au-tonomously explore and plan paths in real, dynamic, and human-free environments, reducing application costs and enhancing system robustness.  

> •

We design and validate a heterogeneous robot collab-oration mechanism in the real-world. We test the path 

> arXiv:2603.21723v2 [cs.RO] 27 Mar 2026

planning paradigm in various settings, including open spaces, obstacle-rich environments, and both indoor and outdoor scenarios. The result demonstrate human-level performance, confirming the method’s practicality and scalability. TZPP lays the groundwork for future LLM-based multi-robot systems in real-world applications. It not only ac-celerates the transition of multi-robot path planning from simulation to reality but also offers new insights and tools for heterogeneous robot collaboration. We have released part of our data and experimental benchmarks to facilitate further research. II. RELATED WORKS For tasks that involve exploration and navigation in un-known environments, common approaches include pretrain-ing to enhance generalization in unfamiliar settings [1], [6], [12], [13], [14], as well as reinforcement learning methods that allow robots to learn efficient navigation strategies through interaction with the environment [15], including the TaskExp method [6] and diffusion-based approaches [12]. These methods demonstrate better adaptability compared to traditional map-dependent approaches [16], [17], [18], [19] but rely heavily on large amounts of high-quality data for pre-training. Furthermore, due to the scarcity of real-world scene data, most research uses simulated environments [1], [3], [6]. However, studies trained and tested in simulated environ-ments often struggle to translate into practical applications due to the gap between realistic and idealized settings. 

A. Collaboration of Heterogeneous Agents 

Homogeneous multiagent collaboration architectures [7], [20], [21], [22], [23] are relatively simple in structural design and control logic, making them easy to implement and scale. However, a lack of appropriate labor management can lead to problems such as planning confusion and resource wastage. In contrast, heterogeneous multi-agent collaboration systems consist of robots with different functionalities or morphologies. They improve execution efficiency through task allocation and specialized design, enabling more rational management over tasks such as navigation and transporta-tion. Representative work includes the GATAR model and perception sharing among heterogeneous robots [1], [2], [3], which facilitate collaborative decision making among multiple agents and demonstrate favorable scalability and environmental adaptability. 

B. Integration of VLMs and Robotics 

Traditional robotic systems depend on predefined rules and specialized perception modules [24], [25]. While these methods perform reliably in structured environments, their generalization capability is limited when faced with open-ended instructions and dynamic environments. Robotic sys-tems incorporating Vision-Language Models (VLMs) sig-nificantly enhance the comprehension of natural language instructions and environmental adaptability through multi-modal fusion and semantic reasoning [26]. This enables zero-shot generalization to unseen instructions [27], [28], [29], thereby supporting more intelligent decision-making. III. O UR TZPP S YSTEM 

A. Overview 

This study focuses on the path planning problem of heterogeneous multi-agent systems, aiming to leverage the complementary strengths of different agents through division of labor and collaboration to achieve efficient exploration of complex real-world environments. The research covers a variety of representative scenarios (including both indoor and outdoor settings) and diverse terrains (such as slopes and staircases). The notations and variables used in the following sections are summarized in Table II. In this work, we take a humanoid agent and a quadruped agent as a typical interaction pair: the humanoid serves as a valuable but relatively less mobile “core” agent, while the quadruped acts as a lower-value but more mobile auxiliary agent. The objective is to guide the core agent, with the col-laborative support of the auxiliary agent, to explore unknown environments and reach designated target locations LT .It’s noteworthy that complex real-world environments pose significant challenges for path planning and task recognition in agent systems. In scenarios lacking salient landmarks, agents struggle to obtain effective localization information, leading to unreliable position estimates, reducing the accu-racy of action decisions. What’s more, in environments where direct access to the target is not possible, agents often need to detour for the goal. To address these challenges, this study adopts acoordinator-explorer architecture design. Specifically, the hu-manoid, as the representative of the core agent, is responsible for task coordination and reaching the designated location, while the quadruped, as the auxiliary agent, undertakes environment exploration and the identification of feasible paths or intermediate waypoints. A typical pipeline of the design is shown in Fig. 1.              

> TABLE II DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLES
> Variable Description
> LTHigh-level task target location (natural language)
> LWQuadruped waypoint location (natural language)
> CInter-agent interaction context
> IBHumanoid’s forward perceptual data
> IDQuadruped’s forward perceptual data
> ddt Euclidean distance to target
> XLandmark-sparse mode
> YObstacle-rich mode
> Rscan Search half-angle Fig. 1. System pipeline of the proposed multi-agent collaboration framework. Given observations from both the humanoid and quadruped perspectives, the system performs reasoning to determine whether the target is directly reachable. If the destination is visible, the humanoid plans and executes obstacle-aware navigation. Otherwise, the humanoid delegates exploration to the quadruped, which surveys the environment and provides feedback on path feasibility. Based on this feedback, the humanoid updates its plan and continues navigation. This iterative collaboration enables robust decision-making and efficient task completion in complex real-world scenarios. 2

B. Humanoid Pipeline 

The humanoid manages high-level coordination through an iterative cycle of path evaluation, pilot exploration and task execution , as illustrated in Fig. 2. In the path-evaluation stage, the agent assesses the feasibility of reaching the global target LT based on its current perceptual input IB ,including target visibility, obstacle distribution, and estimated path accessibility. If a feasible path is inferred (e.g., the target is visible and no blocking structure is detected), the system directly proceeds to task execution. Otherwise, it triggers pilot exploration by assigning intermediate waypoint(s) to the quadruped for environment probing. During the pilot-exploration stage, the humanoid in-crementally receives perceptual feedback ID from the quadruped and evaluates candidate waypoints based on their contribution to improving target visibility or path feasibil-ity. Only waypoints that provide informative or progress-enabling observations are incorporated into the navigation plan, while uninformative exploration results are discarded. In the task-execution stage, the humanoid executes motion commands based on the updated environmental understand-

> 2Robot icons created by Good Ware, robot dog icons created by Izwar Muis - Flaticon

ing, continuously re-evaluating feasibility as new observa-tions become available. This closed-loop process allows the agent to progressively refine its path and approach the target location until successful completion. 

C. Quadruped Pipeline 

The quadruped agent is responsible for environmental exploration and feasible path identification. We designed two different exploration strategies, Mode X and Mode Y , to help the quadruped to better accommodate landmark-sparse and obstacle-rich environments respectively. Its logical workflow, as shown in Algorithm 1, proceeds as follows. First, the agent performs pattern matching based on environmental informa-tion to determine whether the current situation corresponds to a obstacle-rich environment. It then enters a cyclic process consisting of four phases: environment detection, task execution, target detection and environment exploration .In the environment-detection phase, the quadruped per-forms omnidirectional rotational scanning to assess the visi-bility of the assigned waypoint. If the waypoint is not visible, it immediately terminates the task and reports infeasibility to the humanoid agent. If the waypoint is visible, it proceeds to the task-execution phase, moves to the waypoint, returns Fig. 2. Iterative decision-making logic of the humanoid agent. The humanoid evaluates path conditions and adaptively determines whether to proceed directly or request assistance from the quadruped. When path condi-tions are unfavorable, the humanoid iteratively leverages quadruped-guided exploration to identify beneficial waypoints, refining its navigation plan through feedback. Once a feasible waypoint is established, the humanoid proceeds toward it. In contrast, when path conditions are favorable, the humanoid directly selects a waypoint and navigates to the target without additional exploration. This iterative strategy enables robust and efficient navigation under varying environmental conditions. 

environmental perception information to the humanoid, and enters the target-detection phase. In the target-detection phase, the quadruped performs full-range scanning to detect the visibility of the high-level task target and assess path feasibility. If the target is visible and a feasible path exists, it sends a exploration successful signal and current environmental information to the humanoid. If the target is not in sight, or is visible but unreachable from the current position while the system is operating under a landmark-sparse mode, the quadruped terminates the task and reports current environmental information. In a non-globally accessible mode, the agent additionally performs a locally bounded, angle-restricted scan to probe for the existence of potential passages or corridors. 

D. Adaptive Mode X/Y Strategy 

To ensure robust navigation across heterogeneous environ-ments, the robot employs an adaptive switching mechanism between two operational modes: Mode X (landmark-sparse) and Mode Y (obstacle-dense). Mode selection is governed by an environmental accessibility assessment derived from the current perceptual observation ID .Mode X is activated in regions characterized by high global reachability but a dearth of salient features. In this state, the system prioritizes extensive repositioning and 360 ◦

panoramic scanning. This strategy maximizes target visibility and mitigates redundant exploration resulting from percep-tual aliasing in feature-poor environments. Mode Y is triggered when topographical constraints or high obstacle density impede direct global navigation. Be-yond standard waypoint execution, the robot performs con-

Algorithm 1: Quadruped Robot Pipeline 

Input: Humanoid’s target location LT , Quadruped’s waypoint location LW

Output: Reach waypoint successful/failed 

1 if EnvAllReachable( ID ) then 2 mode ← X

3 else 4 mode ← Y

5 end 6 for 360 degrees rotation do 7 if InspectFor( LW , I D ) = false then 8 return false 

9 end 10 end 11 while true do 12 MoveTo( LW , I D );

13 for 360 degrees rotation do 14 if InspectFor( LT , I D ) = true and 

PathIdeal( LT , I D ) = true then 15 return true 

16 end 17 end 18 if mode is Y then 19 for -Rscan to + Rscan degrees rotation do 20 if InspectFor( ‘passage’ , I D ) = true then 21 return true 

22 end 23 end 24 end 25 return false 

26 end 

strained scanning within a localized search half-angle Rscan 

to identify traversable corridors or detours. This allows for calculated deviations from the goal-directed path to circum-vent obstacles in complex spaces. This dual-mode framework enables the system to au-tonomously adapt its exploration behavior to the environmen-tal structure, eliminating the need for environment-specific parameter tuning. IV. EXPERIMENT This experiment aims to address the following questions:  

> •

To what extent can our TZPP paradigm solve the problem of collaborative exploration in complex envi-ronments by heterogeneous multi-agent systems?  

> •

How capable are our TZPP and its two integrated versions (X and Y) when handling scenes with missing landmarks and indirectly navigable scenarios?  

> •

What is the application prospect of our heterogeneous multi-agent combination in path planning problems? 

A. Experimental Setup 

The proposed TZPP method is evaluated across multiple structurally complex, previously unseen physical environ-ments to assess navigation performance in scenarios where TABLE III TASK FINISH COMPARISON OF TZPP VS . HUMAN BASELINE                                              

> TZPP System Human baseline
> T IM E ↓(s) D↓(m) R↓(rad) T IM E ↓(s) D↓(m) R↓(rad) scene 1 64.00 4.00 1.57 53.30 3.80 1.57 scene 2 18.22 2.60 1.05 17.47 2.57 0.79 scene 3 28.58 4.55 2.83 28.01 4.53 2.09 scene 4 120.58 6.80 4.71 80.00 6.47 4.71 scene 5 154.89 14.60 11.78 94.21 13.83 4.29
> TABLE IV TASK PLANNING COMPARISON OF G1-G O2SYSTEM VS .HUMAN BASELINE

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

P S ↑ RM SE ↓ P S ↑ RM SE ↓

scene 1 68.18 85.99 82.19 56.05 scene 2 98.08 14.42 99.23 6.24 scene 3 96.74 40.75 97.13 21.21 scene 4 92.35 120.91 97.06 58.52 scene 5 88.18 56.54 93.13 33.22 

the target is non-line-of-sight (NLOS) from the agent’s initial position. The experimental framework utilizes the Unitree G1 Edu humanoid and Unitree Go2 Edu quadruped platforms. The perception and decision-making architecture is powered by the Doubao-vision-3.6 large vision-language model. All trials were conducted in real-world settings without prior simulation or environment-specific fine-tuning to ensure the validity of the system’s zero-shot generalization capabilities. We evaluate the interaction paradigm across six dimen-sions using 16 metrics. Global Task Efficiency (Dimension 1) is quantified by the total completion time T IM E , the humanoid’s cumulative travel distance D, and its total ro-tation angle R. Path Planning Fidelity (Dimension 2) is assessed via the task completion rate CR ; the path score 

P S , defined as 100 × (Loptimal /L actual ), where Loptimal 

and Lactual represent the optimal and actual path lengths, respectively; and the root mean square error ( RM SE ) of the humanoid’s vertical path deviation: 

RM SE =

vuut 1

n

> n

X

> j=1

min  

> i

∥Pj − p(Pj , L i)∥2 (1) 

Autonomous Exploration (Dimension 3) and Multi-Agent Coordination (Dimension 4) evaluate the quadruped’s utility. These include the key point discovery count NK ; the effective exploration rate EER ; the scouting frequency NE , which is the total number of instances where the quadruped performs reconnaissance for the humanoid agent; the humanoid movement count (Nmove ); and the guidance efficiency coefficient VGE = Dh/D q , where 

Dh and Dq represent the cumulative distances traveled by the humanoid and quadruped, respectively. A VGE 

value approaching unity from the left signifies optimal coordination. Environmental Robustness (Dimension 5) evaluates adaptability in feature-poor scenes via the    

> TABLE V QUADRUPEDAL AGENT EXPLORATION COMPARISON OF
> G1-G O2SYSTEM VS .HUMAN BASELINE

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

NK ↑ EER ↑ NK ↑ EER ↑

scene 1 2 100% 2 100% scene 2 2 100% 2 100% scene 3 2 100% 2 100% scene 4 4 80% 2 100% scene 5 6 100% 6 100%    

> TABLE VI COLLABORATION COMPARISON OF G1-G O2SYSTEM VS .HUMAN BASELINE

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

NE VGE ↓ Nmove ↓ NE VGE ↓ Nmove ↓

scene 1 2 0.98 5 2 0.98 2scene 2 1 0.86 2 1 0.91 2scene 3 2 0.76 5 1 0.91 2scene 4 5 0.72 6 4 0.88 5scene 5 6 0.96 9 5 1.03 6

quadruped’s command compliance rate CCR q , revisit counts for both agents N h

> rev

, N q

> rev

, and the quadruped’s redundant rotation count N q

> rot

.For Constrained Navigation (Dimension 6) , we intro-duce the obstacle avoidance coefficient Vavoid . Let P (t) be a point on the trajectory and Q(t) = argmin X∈O ∥P (t) − X∥

be its projection onto the obstacle surface O. The avoidance magnitude is defined by the arc length Lavoid of the trajectory formed by Q(t):

Lavoid = ArcLength 



{Q(t) | t ∈ [0 , 1] }



(2) 

Vavoid = L(actual) avoid 

L(optimal) avoid 

(3) The evaluation encompasses five distinct real-world sce-narios: an L-turn sofa search (Scene 1); a unilateral-access narrow pillar (Scene 2); a bilateral-passable pillar (Scene 3); a Z-turn fire extinguisher localization (Scene 4); and a ramp-mediated detour to bypass structural steps (Scene 5). Unless otherwise specified, the following default param-eter settings are employed across all experimental trials: maximum displacement and rotation of agents per turn: 

dmax = 2 m and Rmax = π/ 2 rad respectively; target achievement threshold dachieve = 0 .5 m; localized search half-angle Rscan = π/ 2 rad. 

B. Comparative Evaluation of TZPP and Human Operators in Collaborative Path Planning 

In this section, we conduct a controlled comparative evaluation between TZPP and human operators on identical navigation tasks. To ensure fairness, two naive participants were recruited and provided with the same perceptual inputs TABLE VII COMPARATIVE ABLATION STUDY ON HETEROGENEOUS AGENTS 

G1-Go2 G1-only TIME ↓ PS ↑ CR ↑ RSME ↓ TIME ↓ PS ↑ CR ↑ RSME ↓

scene 1 64.00 68.18 100% 85.99 43.12 67.47 100% 86.69 scene 2 18.22 98.08 100% 14.42 16.14 75.59 100% 124.12 scene 3 28.58 96.74 100% 40.75 N/A N/A 33.33% N/A scene 4 120.58 92.35 100% 120.91 N/A N/A 40.00% N/A     

> TABLE VIII OPEN AREA COMPARISON OF G1-G O2( WITHOUT MODE X), G1-G O2SYSTEM AND HUMAN BASELINE

Time ↓ CCR q ↑ N1↓ N2↓ N3↓

G1(no X)-Go2 43.78 56.27% 0.6 1.4 3G1-Go2 46.28 86.00% 0 0.2 0.6 Human 54.60 80.00% 0 0 0.2                

> N1, N 2, N 3represent Nh
> rev ,Nq
> rev ,Nq
> rot respectively.
> TABLE IX OBSTACLE HANDLING COMPARISON OF G1-G O2( WITHOUT MODE Y), G1-G O2SYSTEM AND HUMAN BASELINE

Time ↓ Vavoid 

G1(no Y)-Go2 System N/A 0.23 G1-Go2 System 154.89 1.00 Human baseline 94.21 1.00 

as the robotic system, namely real-time first-person visual streams from both the humanoid and quadruped sensors. No global map or third-person view was available. In addition, the control interface and action constraints were kept con-sistent with those of the autonomous system, ensuring that both human operators and TZPP operated under equivalent information and execution conditions. Tables III to VI summarize the results across multiple metrics. Overall, the G1-Go2 system achieves performance comparable to human operators in terms of task completion and coordination efficiency. In particular, for the humanoid movement distance ( D), the autonomous system reaches over 

95% of human performance, indicating similar levels of path efficiency under the same perceptual constraints. Further analysis shows that TZPP maintains stable perfor-mance across different scenarios, especially in cases where consistent coordination between exploration and execution is required. However, performance gaps remain in certain complex environments, where human operators may better leverage implicit spatial reasoning or long-horizon planning strategies. Overall, the results suggest that TZPP can achieve com-petitive collaborative efficiency under equivalent conditions, while demonstrating consistent adaptability in unseen envi-ronments. These findings support the effectiveness of the proposed coordination mechanism without overstating parity with human performance. 

C. Ablation Study on Mode X/Y Mechanism 

To evaluate the contribution of the adaptive exploration strategy, we compare the full G1-Go2 system with two degraded variants: one with Mode X disabled (G1-Go2(-X)) and one with Mode Y disabled (G1-Go2(-Y)), under identical task settings. Human operators are included as a reference baseline under the same perceptual and control constraints. 

1) In Open Scenarios Lacking Landmarks: The experi-ments were conducted in open environments without salient visual references (e.g., locating a sofa in a corridor). Ta-ble VIII shows that, disabling Mode X leads to a notice-able decrease in exploration efficiency and task stability. This result suggests that Mode X improves performance in landmark-sparse scenes by reducing repeated exploration caused by visual ambiguity and limited reference cues. 

2) In Scenarios without Direct Accessible Paths: The experiments were conducted in obstacle-rich environments requiring detour-based navigation (e.g., navigating around structural barriers or staircases).Table IX shows that, re-moving Mode Y significantly reduces success rates and planning efficiency. The results indicate that Mode Y en-hances navigation in structurally constrained environments by enabling corridor probing and temporary deviation from the direct goal direction. Overall, the results show that Mode X and Mode Y address different environmental challenges and jointly improve system adaptability across heterogeneous scenarios. 

D. Ablation Study on the Necessity of Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems for Navigation 

To evaluate the role of heterogeneous collaboration, we compare the full G1-Go2 system with a single-agent G1 setup under identical task conditions. As shown in Table VII, the heterogeneous system achieves consistently better per-formance in terms of task completion rate, path efficiency, and navigation stability.This improvement stems from the complementary capabilities of the two agents. The quadruped enhances exploration by providing wider perceptual coverage and accessing regions that are difficult for the humanoid, while the humanoid focuses on task coordination and goal-directed execution. This division of roles reduces inefficient exploration and improves robustness, particularly in scenar-ios where the target is not directly observable or requires detour-based navigation. These results highlight the practical importance of embodiment complementarity in heteroge-neous multi-agent systems. V. CONCLUSIONS This paper presented Triple Zero Path Planning (TZPP), a heterogeneous multi-agent navigation framework that op-erates without task-specific training, prior environmental knowledge, or simulation pre-adaptation. By leveraging a coordinator–explorer architecture between a humanoid and a quadruped robot, the system exploits embodiment comple-mentarity to decouple exploration and execution, enabling effective navigation in previously unseen real-world environ-ments. To tackle challenges in landmark-sparse and non-directly accessible environments, we propose an adaptive exploration strategy with Mode X and Mode Y. Mode X enhances efficiency in open, visually sparse scenes, while Mode Y supports detour-based navigation in structurally constrained settings. Extensive experiments, including ablations and con-trolled comparisons with human operators, show that the system achieves near-human path efficiency and consistent performance, with both modes contributing significantly by addressing complementary environmental challenges. Overall, TZPP provides a practical coordination mech-anism for heterogeneous robotic systems and highlights the importance of embodiment complementarity for robust navigation. The proposed framework offers a scalable design perspective for deploying multi-agent systems in dynamic and structurally complex environments. REFERENCES [1] L. Ratnabala, A. Fedoseev, R. Peter, and D. Tsetserukou, “Magnnet: Multi-agent graph neural network-based efficient task allocation for autonomous vehicles with deep reinforcement learning,” 2025. [2] J. Peng, H. Viswanath, and A. Bera, “Graph-based decentralized task allocation for multi-robot target localization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 10676–10683, 2024. [3] Y. Chen and J. Xiao, “Target search and navigation in heterogeneous robot systems with deep reinforcement learning,” Machine Intelligence Research , vol. 22, p. 79–90, Jan. 2025. [4] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song, “Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collab-oration with large language models,” 2023. [5] Y. Chen, J. Arkin, Y. Zhang, N. Roy, and C. Fan, “Scalable multi-robot collaboration with large language models: Centralized or decentralized systems?,” 2024. [6] S. Zhu, Y. Zhao, Y. Xu, A. Chen, J. Chen, and J. Xu, “Taskexp: Enhancing generalization of multi-robot exploration with multi-task pre-training,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6559–6565, 2025. [7] V. L. N. Venkatesh and B.-C. Min, “Zerocap: Zero-shot multi-robot context aware pattern formation via large language models,” 2025. [8] A. Author, B. Author, and C. Author, “Coherent: Collaboration of heterogeneous models for autonomous agents,” arXiv preprint , 2024. arXiv:2409.15146. [9] X. Author, Y. Author, and Z. Author, “Sigma: Sheaf-informed geomet-ric multi-agent pathfinding,” arXiv preprint , 2025. arXiv:2502.06440. [10] K. de Vos, E. Torta, H. Bruyninckx, C. L. Martinez, and R. van de Molengraft, “Hybrid decision making for scalable multi-agent navi-gation: Integrating semantic maps, discrete coordination, and model predictive control,” 2024. [11] A. J. Sathyamoorthy, K. Weerakoon, M. Elnoor, M. Russell, J. Pusey, and D. Manocha, “Mim: Indoor and outdoor navigation in complex environments using multi-layer intensity maps,” in 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 10917– 10924, 2024. [12] C. Pan, Z. Yi, G. Shi, and G. Qu, “Model-based diffusion for trajectory optimization,” 2024. [13] K. Su, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Zhu, and B. Zhang, “To boost zero-shot generalization for embodied reasoning with vision-language pre-training,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 33, pp. 5370– 5381, 2024. [14] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine, “Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pp. 63–70, 2024. [15] Y. Cao, R. Zhao, Y. Wang, B. Xiang, and G. Sartoretti, “Deep reinforcement learning-based large-scale robot exploration,” 2024. [16] K. Rana, J. Haviland, S. Garg, J. Abou-Chakra, I. Reid, and N. Suen-derhauf, “Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning,” 2023. [17] M. Booker, G. Byrd, B. Kemp, A. Schmidt, and C. Rivera, “Embod-iedrag: Dynamic 3d scene graph retrieval for efficient and scalable robot task planning,” 2024. [18] A. Werby, C. Huang, M. B¨ uchner, A. Valada, and W. Burgard, “Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language-grounded robot navigation,” in First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. [19] A. Meysami, S. Kelouwani, J.-C. Cuilliere, V. Francois, A. Amamou, and B. Allani, “An efficient indoor large map global path planning for robot navigation,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 248, p. 123388, 2024. [20] W. Zhang, C. Street, and M. Mansouri, “Multi-nonholonomic robot object transportation with obstacle crossing using a deformable sheet,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 7349–7355, 2025. [21] S. Wu, C. Wang, J. Pan, D. Han, and Z. Zhao, “Bayesian-guided evolutionary strategy with rrt for multi-robot exploration,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pp. 12720–12726, 2024. [22] Z. Xiao, P. Li, C. Liu, H. Gao, and X. Wang, “Macns: A generic graph neural network integrated deep reinforcement learning based multi-agent collaborative navigation system for dynamic trajectory planning,” Information Fusion , vol. 105, p. 102250, 2024. [23] T. Soualhi, N. Crombez, Y. Ruichek, A. Lombard, and S. Gal-land, “Learning decentralized multi-robot pointgoal navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 4117–4124, 2025. [24] F. Khadivar, K. Chatzilygeroudis, and A. Billard, “Self-correcting quadratic programming-based robot control,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 5236– 5247, 2023. [25] A. Ghorbanpour, “Cooperative robot manipulators dynamical model-ing and control: An overview,” Dynamics , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 820–854, 2023. [26] Z. Yan, S. Li, Z. Wang, L. Wu, H. Wang, J. Zhu, L. Chen, and J. Liu, “Dynamic open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for long-term language-guided mobile manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4252–4259, 2025. [27] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choro-manski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn, P. Florence, C. Fu, M. G. Arenas, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Han, K. Hausman, A. Her-zog, J. Hsu, B. Ichter, A. Irpan, N. Joshi, R. Julian, D. Kalash-nikov, Y. Kuang, I. Leal, L. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, H. Michalewski, I. Mordatch, K. Pertsch, K. Rao, K. Reymann, M. Ryoo, G. Salazar, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, J. Singh, A. Singh, R. Soricut, H. Tran, V. Vanhoucke, Q. Vuong, A. Wahid, S. Welker, P. Wohlhart, J. Wu, F. Xia, T. Xiao, P. Xu, S. Xu, T. Yu, and B. Zitkovich, “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” 2023. [28] A. Rajvanshi, K. Sikka, X. Lin, B. Lee, H.-P. Chiu, and A. Velasquez, “Saynav: Grounding large language models for dynamic planning to navigation in new environments,” 2024. [29] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei, “Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models,” 2023.