Title: Action-Graph Policies: Learning Action Co-dependencies in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.17009v2

Published Time: Tue, 24 Feb 2026 02:18:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Action-Graph Policies: Learning Action Co-dependencies in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Nikunj Gupta 1 James Zachary Hare 2 Jesse Milzman 2 Rajgopal Kannan 3 Viktor Prasanna 1

# Abstract 

Coordinating actions is the most fundamental form of cooperation in multi-agent reinforce-ment learning (MARL). Successful decentralized decision-making often depends not only on good individual actions, but on selecting compatible ac-tions across agents to synchronize behavior, avoid conflicts, and satisfy global constraints. In this paper, we propose Action Graph Policies (AGP), that model dependencies among agents’ available action choices. It constructs, what we call, co-ordination contexts , that enable agents to condi-tion their decisions on global action dependencies. Theoretically, we show that AGPs induce a strictly more expressive joint policy compared to fully in-dependent policies and can realize coordinated joint actions that are provably more optimal than greedy execution even from centralized value-decomposition methods. Empirically, we show that AGP achieves 80-95% success on canonical coordination tasks with partial observability and anti-coordination penalties, where other MARL methods reach only 10-25%. We further demon-strate that AGP consistently outperforms these baselines in diverse multi-agent environments. 

# 1. Introduction 

Multi-agent systems face coordination challenges across diverse domains: swarms of autonomous drones must co-ordinate surveillance patterns without collisions (Marek et al., 2025; Alqudsi & Makaraci, 2025; Tahir et al., 2019), warehouse robots must allocate tasks to avoid congestion (Zhen et al., 2025; Keith & La, 2024), and distributed sen-sor networks must jointly select which nodes transmit to conserve energy (Li et al., 2022). In each case, success requires agents to satisfy global constraints, for example, 

> 1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

> 2

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA 

> 3

DEVCOM ARL Army Research Office, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Nikunj Gupta <nikunj@usc.edu >.

Preprint. February 24, 2026. 

exactly K agents must be active, no two robots may select the same resource, or total transmissions must remain below a threshold, while making decentralized decisions based only on local observations. These coordination problems share a common structure: optimal joint behavior depends not merely on each agent selecting a good individual action, but on the compatibility of actions across the team. When exactly three vehicles must enter an intersection simultane-ously for smooth traffic flow, or when a formation requires precisely two agents to occupy point positions, independent decision-making systematically fails. Yet in decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), the dominant learning paradigms continue to assume complete agent in-dependence even during centralized training (Zhang et al., 2021a; Oroojlooy & Hajinezhad, 2023). This imposes a policy-side restriction, fundamentally limiting which coor-dinated joint actions can be represented or enforced. In many coordination-critical applications, it is both rea-sonable and desirable to minimally relax strict indepen-dence at execution time, allowing limited, structured coor-dination. Examples include shared situational context in robotics teams (Wang et al., 2022b; Siddiqua et al., 2024; Senaratne et al., 2025), lightweight coordination primitives in networked control systems (Liu et al., 2025; Mason et al., 2024), or pre-decision aggregation in multi-robot planning (Ebert, 2022). These settings motivate policy architectures that move beyond fully independent execution, without re-sorting to fully centralized or sequential control. In this paper, we propose Action-Graph Policies (AGP) ,a policy architecture that enables richer coordination by explicitly modeling action-level relations among agents. Rather than treating agents as the fundamental units of co-ordination, AGP adopts an action-centric representation in which individual (agent , action ) pairs are modeled as nodes in a learned graph. The key insight is that coordination con-straints such as “exactly K agents act” or “no two agents select the same resource” are naturally expressed as relation-ships between specific action choices across agents. AGP constructs embeddings for each such pair and applies graph attention over these action nodes to learn which combina-tions are compatible or conflicting. Each agent’s policy then conditions on its local observation and a learned “coordina-1

> arXiv:2602.17009v2 [cs.LG] 22 Feb 2026 AGP-MARL

tion context” which summarizes how its available actions participate in the global coordination structure. This de-sign enables the policy to represent joint behaviors that are unreachable under independent factorization. This paper makes four primary contributions. First , we pro-vide a formal analysis of the policy-side bottleneck, charac-terizing coordination problems where independent policies are provably suboptimal and showing that value decomposi-tion cannot overcome this limitation. Second , we introduce Action-Graph Policies that model action-level dependencies to enable coordinated joint behavior with minimal relaxation of decentralized execution. Third , we present a theoretical characterization of the joint policy class induced by AGP, proving that it strictly generalizes independent decentralized policies and admits joint policies that are provably closer (in forward KL divergence) to optimal centralized policies than any independently factorized execution. Finally , we empiri-cally validate AGP on coordination benchmarks: in canoni-cal games with partial observability and anti-coordination penalties, AGP achieves 80 -95% success while other MARL methods achieve only 10 -25% , and in diverse multi-agent domains, AGP exceeds strong MARL baselines. 

# 2. Preliminaries and Related Works 

Model. We model a cooperative MARL problem as a decentralized partially observable Markov decision pro-cess (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek et al., 2016; Bernstein et al., 2002), defined by the tuple 

M = ⟨I , S, {A i}i∈I , T , R, {O i}i∈I , Ω, γ ⟩. (1) Here, I = {1, . . . , N } is the set of agents, S is the global state space, Ai is the discrete action space of agent i,

A = Q 

> i∈I

Ai is the joint action space, T (s′ | s, a) is the transition function, R(s, a) is the shared reward, Oi is the observation space of agent i, Ω( o | s, a) is the obser-vation function, and γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor. At each timestep t, the environment is in an unobserved state 

st ∈ S . Each agent i receives a local observation oi,t ∈ O i,selects an action ai,t ∈ A i, and we denote the joint ob-servation and joint action as ot = ( o1,t , . . . , o N,t ) and 

at = ( a1,t , . . . , a N,t ). The joint action at produces a shared reward rt = R(st, at) and a next state st+1 ∼ T (· | st, at).A stochastic joint policy π is a conditional distribution 

π(a | o) = π(a1, . . . , a N | o1, . . . , o N ), mapping joint ob-servations o to joint actions a. The objective is to maximize the expected discounted return J(π) = Eπ, T

h P∞ 

> t=0

γtrt

i

.We denote the joint action-value function by Qπ (s, a) and the state-value function by V π (s).

Joint Policies and Independent-Policy Factorization. Ajoint policy specifies a distribution over joint actions condi-tioned on joint observations, 

π(a | o) ∈ ∆( A1 × · · · × A N ), (2) where ∆( ·) denotes the probability simplex over a finite set, 

o and a. This joint policy fully characterizes the coordinated behavior of the multi-agent system. Directly representing or learning π(a | o) is generally intractable due to the expo-nential growth of the joint action space with the number of agents. For this reason, most decentralized MARL methods approximate the joint policy using a product of per-agent policies, πi(ai | oi), yielding the independent policy form 

π(a | o) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

πi(ai | oi). (3) This factorization is referred to as the independent global optimum (IGO) assumption (Zhang et al., 2021b). We de-note by Πind the class of all joint policies admitting this factorization. Importantly, Πind defines a strict subset of all possible joint distributions over actions. 

Value Decomposition Methods. To compensate for the loss of expressiveness induced by independent policies, many MARL methods adopt a centralized training, decen-tralized execution (CTDE) paradigm (Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016; Amato, 2024) and introduce coordination on the value side. In this framework, agents still execute independent policies of the form πi(ai | oi), but learning is guided by a centralized action-value function that evaluates joint ac-tions. Value-decomposition methods (Sunehag et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2020b;a; Son et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020) instantiate this idea by learning per-agent utility functions 

Qi(oi, a i) together with a mixing function that combines them into a joint value, 

Qtot (o, a) = f  Q1(o1, a 1), . . . , Q N (oN , a N ), (4) where f is designed to ensure that decentralized greedy action selection with respect to each Qi is consistent with maximizing Qtot . For instance, VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017) uses a simple additive mixing, while QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020b) and its variants learn a more flexible, monotonic mixing network. More expressive value-based methods introduce structured interactions between agents’ actions through coordination graphs (B ¨ohmer et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022a; Gupta et al., 2025a; Duan et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2025). In this setting, agents are repre-sented as nodes in a graph, and edges encode pairwise utility functions between agents. The joint value is decomposed as 

Qtot (o, a) = 1 

> |V|

X

> i

Qi(oi, a i)+ 1

> |E|

X

> (i,j )∈E

Qij (oi, a i, o j , a j ).

(5) 2AGP-MARL 

where E denotes the set of edges in the coordination graph. Although these methods improve coordination dur-ing learning, their representational power remains inherently constrained and susceptible to relative overgeneralization 

(B ¨ohmer et al., 2020; Panait et al., 2006), i.e., agents over-generalize toward locally optimal actions under additive or monotonic factorizations, leading to miscoordination. Joint values expressed in this form cannot capture general higher-order coordination without becoming intractable (Castellini et al., 2019). See Appendix B for a detailed discussion. 

Action-dependent policies. Action-dependent policies relax independent factorization by allowing an agent’s deci-sion to condition on other agents’ actions or action distribu-tions. In general, such policies take the form 

πi(ai | oi, a −i) or π(a | o) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

πi(ai | oi, a−i),

(6) thereby enlarging the realizable joint policy class beyond 

Πind . Prior work instantiates this idea through autoregres-sive (Wen et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2022) or DAG-based fac-torizations (Ruan et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), which gen-erate joint actions sequentially under a fixed or learned ordering. Recent work on policy factorization (Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021b; Fu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2025) uses dependent policies during centralized training to guide independent policy learning and execution. While these approaches improve expressiveness, they typically require explicit agent orderings, introduce asymmetries, or rely on conditioning on preceding actions, complicating decentral-ized execution. 

# 3. Analysis 

As defined in Section 2, decentralized execution under IGO assumption (Zhang et al., 2021b) restricts policies to the factorized class Πind . Equivalently, for any joint observation 

o, the set of joint action distributions that can be executed at test time is limited to product-form distributions 

Pind (o) = 

(

p(a) : p(a) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

pi(ai)

)

. (7) Throughout this section, we analyze the consequences of this execution constraint. In particular, we distinguish be-tween joint policies that are representable or learnable dur-ing centralized training, and those that are executable under decentralized control. Our results characterize coordinated behaviors that fall outside Pind (o) and are therefore inac-cessible to independently executed policies, regardless of the training procedure or value-function expressiveness. 

Independent Execution Is Structurally Suboptimal. 

We first establish that restricting execution to Πind can be fundamentally suboptimal. 

Theorem 3.1 (Independent policies are not universally opti-mal) . There exist cooperative Dec-POMDPs with determin-istic optimal joint policies π∗ such that π∗ /∈ Πind .

Proof. See Appendix A.1. This result is not about optimization difficulty or credit assignment, but about representational limits. Independent policies cannot enforce hard coordination constraints that depend on the joint action a as a whole, such as requiring exactly K agents to act, selecting a unique committing agent, or satisfying global action patterns. Such constraints define subsets of A that are not decomposable into independent marginals and so cannot be represented by policies in Πind .

Value Decomposition Does Not Remove the Policy-Side Bottleneck. Value-decomposition addresses coordination by coupling agents during training through a centralized joint action-value function Qtot (o, a). However, decentral-ized execution remains independent: agents select actions greedily with respect to local utilities, 

a(o) =  arg max 

> a1

Q1(o1, a 1), . . . , arg max 

> aN

QN (oN , a N ).

(8) So, execution is still restricted to joint actions in Pind (o).

Theorem 3.2 (Value–policy mismatch) . There exist coop-erative Dec-POMDPs and centralized joint action-value functions Qtot (o, a) such that: 1. Qtot admits an exact representation by a value-decomposition model, and 2. the optimal joint action 

a∗(o) = arg max  

> a

Qtot (o, a)

cannot be realized by decentralized greedy execution under independent policies. 

Proof. See Appendix A.2. Theorem 3.2 highlights a fundamental mismatch between value expressiveness and policy executability. Even when the centralized value function correctly identifies the optimal joint action, decentralized greedy execution is constrained to select actions independently. Increasing the expressiveness of Qtot alone therefore does not enlarge the set of joint behaviors that can be executed. 

The Policy-Side Bottleneck. Consider that N agents with binary actions must ensure that exactly K select action 1

(e.g., exactly 2 out of 5 drones ascend to high altitude for communication relay). Under an independent policy where each agent selects action 1 with probability p, the probability 3AGP-MARL 

of achieving exactly K selections is 

Pr 

> N

X

> i=1

ai = K

!

=

NK



pK (1 − p)N −K (9) Even at the optimal choice p⋆ = K/N , this probability is strictly less than 1. For N = 5 and K = 2 , the maxi-mum achievable probability is only 0.3456 , implying that the team fails nearly 65% of the time despite optimal in-dependent policies. A centralized controller, by contrast, can deterministically select exactly K agents and achieve 

100% success. This performance gap does not arise from learning difficulty or credit assignment, but from a repre-sentational limitation: the optimal joint action distribution, which concentrates probability mass on configurations with exactly K active agents, cannot be factored into a product of independent marginals. We refer to this as a policy-side bottleneck . Variants of this analysis have been recognized in different forms in prior work, for instance, through assumptions such as independent global maxima or optimality, or relative overgeneralization, but typically as side effects of specific algorithms or learn-ing dynamics (Zhang et al., 2021a; Fu et al., 2022; B ¨ohmer et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2023). Here, we abstract these phenomena into an explicit, execution-level characterization, isolating the structural limitations imposed by independent policies themselves. Our results are intended to characterize coordinated behaviors that fall outside Pind (o) and are inaccessible to independently exe-cuted policies, regardless of the training procedure or value function expressiveness. 

# 4. Action-Graph Policies 

We now address the limitations discussed in Section 3 by enlarging the decentralized policy class itself. Our approach introduces a structured notion of coordination context over actions and instantiates it through Action Graph Policies .

Coordination Contexts. We formalize coordination as a property of the joint action structure rather than of individ-ual agents. In many cooperative tasks, agents must select actions that collectively satisfy global constraints (e.g., car-dinality, exclusivity, or synchronization), which cannot be verified or enforced by inspecting any agent’s action in iso-lation. As a result, effective coordination requires reasoning about relationships between actions across agents. Let I = {1, . . . , N } denote the set of agents and Ai the discrete action space of agent i. We define a global action-dependency graph 

GA = ( V, E), V = {uia : i ∈ I , a ∈ A i}, (10) whose nodes correspond to available actions of all agents (as in Fig. 1). That is, GA is constructed over the union of action sets S 

> i∈I

Ai, and contains one node uia for each agent–action choice (i, a ), rather than a separate graph per agent. Edges encode coordination-relevant dependencies between action choices of different agents. This graph pro-vides a representation of the joint action structure without enumerating explicit joint actions. For each agent i, we define its coordination context as a structured summary κi,obtained from the restriction of GA to agent i’s action nodes. Formally, 

κi = Ψ 



GA Vi



, Vi = {uia : a ∈ A i}, (11) where Ψ is a permutation-invariant mapping that aggre-gates coordination-relevant information from the action-dependency graph. Intuitively, κi summarizes how agent i’s available actions interact with other agents’ action choices, capturing, for example, which actions are mutually exclu-sive, which require simultaneous activation, or which sub-sets of actions jointly satisfy global constraints. κi depends on action–action relationships rather than on explicit joint actions, and can be computed prior to action selection. Us-ing coordination contexts, we define context-conditioned policies of the form 

πi(ai | oi, κi), (12) where oi denotes agent i’s local observation. This formula-tion preserves simultaneous execution while allowing each agent’s policy to condition on structured information about joint actions. Independent policies are recovered as the spe-cial case where GA contains no edges, making κi a constant. 

Action-Graph Policies. We now present Action-Graph Policies (AGP) as a concrete instantiation of context-conditioned policies in which coordination contexts are constructed via learned action-dependency graphs (see Algo-rithm 1 and Appendix G). We treat individual agent–action choices as first-class entities. For each agent i ∈ I and action a ∈ A i, we define an action node uia ∈ V . Each node is associated with an action-centric representation 

xia = ϕ(oi, a ), (13) where ϕ is a shared encoder combining local observation and action identity. This construction is permutation-invariant with respect to agent indexing. AGP instantiates GA as a fully connected directed graph over the action nodes V =

{uia} and learns coordination dependencies via attention-based message passing (Veli ˇckovi ´c et al., 2018). For each action node uia, we compute an updated representation 

hia = X 

> ujb∈V

α(i,a ),(j,b ) xjb, (14) where attention weights α(i,a ),(j,b ) are learned and normal-ized across all nodes in V. Stacking multiple message-passing layers allows higher-order action dependencies to 4AGP-MARL           

> Figure 1. Illustration of Action-Graph Policies (AGP). The global action graph GAcontains one node uiafor each available action
> a∈ A iof every agent i, with edges representing learned coordination dependencies across action choices. Coordination contexts κiare constructed by aggregating information from this action graph prior to decentralized action selection.

be captured. The coordination context for agent i is obtained by aggregating over its action nodes: 

κi = Pool  {hia : a ∈ A i}, (15) where Pool is a permutation-invariant operator. An Action-Graph Policy then instantiates (12) by defining a context-conditioned scoring function fθ (oi, a i, κi) over agent i’s available actions. This function can be instan-tiated either as a stochastic policy or as an action-value function, depending on the learning paradigm. In the value-based instantiation used throughout this work, AGP induces a context-conditioned action-value function Qi(oi, κi, a i),and decentralized execution proceeds via ϵ-greedy action selection: 

ai ←

(

arg max a∈A i Qi(oi, κi, a ), w.p. 1 − ϵ, 

Uniform (Ai), w.p. ϵ. (16) 

Induced Joint Policy. AGP induces the joint policy 

πAGP (a | o) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

πi(ai | oi, κi), (17) where dependencies between agents’ actions arise implic-itly through the shared action-dependency graph used to construct the coordination contexts. 

Properties of Action Graph Policies. We now establish two fundamental properties of the joint policy class induced by AGPs. Together, these results formalize how AGP re-solves the policy-side bottleneck identified in Section 3 by enlarging the class of decentralized policies that can realize coordinated joint behavior. 

Algorithm 1 Action Graph Policies (AGP) 

Require: Local observations ot = (ot

> 1

, . . . , o tN ) and available-action masks {avail ti(·)}Ni=1 

Ensure: Joint action at = ( at

> 1

, . . . , a tN ) 

> 1:

Form global action-node set V = {uia : i ∈{1, . . . , N }, a ∈ A i} 

> 2:

for each node uia ∈ V do  

> 3:

xia ← ϕ(oti, a ) 

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

{hia}uia∈V ← MP θ ({xia}uia∈V , GA) (L attention layers) 6: for i = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 7:

κi ← Pool( {hia : a ∈ A i}, avail ti) (masked pool) 8: ati ← ϵ-Greedy 



{Qi(τ ti , κi, a )}a∈A i , avail ti

 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return at

Theorem 4.1 (Strict Joint-Policy Expressivity) . Let Πind 

denote the class of decentralized joint policies that factorize independently as π(a | o) = QNi=1 πi(ai | oi). Then the class of joint policies induced by Action Graph Policies, 

ΠAGP , satisfies 

Πind ⊊ ΠAGP .

That is, AGP strictly generalizes independent policies. 

Proof. See Appendix C.1 and C.2. This establishes that AGP enlarges the executable policy class in decentralized MARL. Such strict expressivity gain over independent policies formalizes how AGP resolves the policy-side bottleneck: it enables execution of coordinated joint behaviors that are provably unreachable under indepen-dent factorization, even when training is fully centralized. 

Theorem 4.2 (KL-Optimal Approximation of Centralized 5AGP-MARL 

Joint Policies) . Fix any Dec-POMDP and any centralized joint policy π⋆(a | o) with full support (see Appendix C.3). Let Πind be the class of independently factorized joint poli-cies π(a | o) = QNi=1 πi(ai | oi), and let ΠAGP be the class of joint policies induced by Action Graph Policies. Define the best achievable forward KL divergences 

Dind := inf 

> π∈Πind

Eo∼d

KL  π⋆(· | o) ∥ π(· | o) ,DAGP := inf 

> π∈ΠAGP

Eo∼d

KL  π⋆(· | o) ∥ π(· | o) ,

where d is any reference distribution over joint observations (e.g., the occupancy measure under π⋆). Then: 

DAGP ≤ Dind .

Moreover, there exist Dec-POMDPs (and optimal π⋆) for which the inequality is strict: 

DAGP < D ind .

Proof. See Appendix C.3. Theorem 4.2 formalizes a precise notion of policy optimality for AGP: among all decentralized policies, AGP admits joint policies that are at least as close in forward KL to an opti-mal centralized policy as the best independently factorized approximation, and can be strictly closer. This shows that AGP reduces the value–policy mismatch by enlarging the executable policy family, rather than relying on more accu-rate centralized value functions whose greedy decentralized execution remains independent. 

Learning Action Graph Policies. As illustrated in Fig. 1, learning proceeds by first encoding each agent’s available actions into action-centric representations {xia}uia∈V , which are processed through shared graph attention layers to con-struct coordination contexts κi. These contexts are differen-tiable functions of the action representations and attention parameters, allowing gradients to propagate through the en-tire action-graph construction. We consider a value-based in-stantiation of AGP. Each agent learns a context-conditioned action-value function Qi(τi, κi, a i), where τi denotes the agent’s action-observation history. The AGP parameters are optimized by minimizing a centralized temporal-difference loss, while execution uses decentralized greedy or ϵ-greedy action selection. Coordination is learned implicitly through gradients flowing into the action-graph attention mecha-nism, enabling the model to discover which action–action dependencies are relevant for maximizing return. At execution time, agents act in parallel using a fixed, learned message-passing mechanism, without any central-ized controller or joint-action inference. Each agent com-putes its coordination context κi from the action graph and selects an action via its local policy πi(ai | oi, κi), without observing other agents’ realized actions. This execution model is analogous to coordination-graph methods (e.g., DCG (B ¨ohmer et al., 2020)), which permit learned message passing at test time but prohibit centralized action selection. This section establishes Action Graph Policies as a princi-pled resolution to the policy-side bottleneck in decentralized MARL. By representing coordination explicitly over actions and embedding it directly into the executable policy, AGP enlarges the class of realizable joint behaviors beyond in-dependent execution. Theoretical guarantees show that this expanded policy class is both strictly more expressive and closer to optimal joint behavior than value-based coordina-tion alone. In the following section, we empirically validate these claims and demonstrate that AGP yields consistent performance gains on coordination-critical benchmarks. 

# 5. Experiments and Results 

We now investigate whether these AGP’s insights translate to empirical gains. We organize the evaluation into two parts. Section 5.1 presents controlled experiments on matrix games specifically designed to isolate the policy-side bot-tleneck. These games admit clean theoretical analysis and allow us to verify that observed performance gaps match the-oretical predictions. Section 5.2 evaluates AGP on diverse multi-agent tasks, demonstrating that the benefits of action-level coordination extend to more complex, continuous-state domains with partial observability and temporal dynamics. Throughout, we compare AGP against representative meth-ods from major related MARL paradigms: independent learners (IQL (Tan, 1993)), value decomposition (VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020b)), co-ordination graphs (DCG (B ¨ohmer et al., 2020), DICG (Li et al., 2020)), and policy factorization (MACPF (Wang et al., 2023), FOP (Zhang et al., 2021b)). Implementation details and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix D. All re-sults are averaged over five independent trials per method; we report test return mean curves with shaded regions indi-cating standard deviation to reflect variability across runs. 

5.1. Coordination Matrix Games Top-K Selection. Consider N agents who must collec-tively select exactly K of their members to perform a criti-cal action (e.g., exactly two drones in a swarm must ascend to relay altitude). Each agent i observes a private signal 

ui ∈ [0 , 1] indicating its suitability for selection (e.g., bat-tery level, signal strength, or proximity to target). The optimal collective decision is for the K agents with the highest signals to act. Formally, each agent i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }

observes oi = ui where ui ∼ Uniform [0 , 1] independently, and selects an action ai ∈ { 0, 1}. Let S = {i : ai = 1 }

denote the set of agents selecting action 1, and let TK =

6AGP-MARL 

arg top-Ki{ui} denote the indices of the K highest signals. The shared reward is: 

R(a, u) = 

(

+1 if S = TK

−1 otherwise (18)          

> Figure 2. Coordination matrix games. (a) Top-KSelection (N=6 ,K=2 ): baselines cluster near the independent-execution bound, while AGP achieves near-optimal coordination. (b) Top-
> Kwith anti-coordination penalty: baselines suffer from relative overgeneralization, whereas AGP remains robust.

Under any independent policy where agents act based solely on their own signals, the probability of exactly K agents selecting action 1 is maximized when each agent uses p∗ =

K/N . For our experimental setting of N = 6 and K = 2 ,this yields success probability of p∗ 

> ind

≈ 0.329 by Equation 9. Independent policies cannot exceed this bound regardless of how they are trained; achieving higher success requires policies that can correlate agents’ decisions. The results strikingly confirm our theoretical analysis (see Figure 2(a)). We report the success rate, defined as the em-pirical probability P[S = TK ] that S = TK , i.e., the fraction of evaluation episodes receiving reward +1 . All baselines achieve success rates clustered around the theoretical bound of 0.329, ranging from 0.232 (QMIX) to 0.450 (DCG). This clustering is remarkable: despite substantial differences in architecture and training procedure, no baseline significantly exceeds what independent execution permits. In contrast, AGP achieves 95.7% success. We note that some meth-ods, such as DCG, can occasionally exceed the expected independent bound. This behavior is attributable to stochas-tic policies, finite-sample effects, and centralized training signals that bias learning toward favorable correlations. 

Top-K Selection with Anti-Coordination Penalty. We also evaluate a variant that penalizes coordination failures among agents with similar signals. When two agents i and 

j satisfy |ui − uj | < ϵ (with ϵ = 0 .1) and both select action 1, an additional penalty of λ = 0 .5 is incurred. This explicitly induces relative overgeneralization (B ¨ohmer et al., 2020; Panait et al., 2006), as independent execution tends to average out the anti-coordination penalty and converge to suboptimal correlated actions, providing a controlled test of whether AGP can overcome this pathology via action-level coordination. Results in Figure 2(b) mirror the Top-

K case but expose the failure modes more sharply. All baselines experience a substantial drop in success due to the penalty, converging to low-success regimes characteristic of relative overgeneralization. In contrast, AGP continues to achieve consistently high success ( ≈ 96%), demonstrating robust resolution of both cardinality and anti-coordination constraints through explicit action-level coordination. 

Ablations. Figure 3 shows our targeted ablations to isolate the impact of AGP’s components in its performance.   

> Figure 3. Ablations. Removing cross-agent action dependencies or the action graph drastically collapses the performance, while a policy-gradient AGP variant recovers similar performance.

Ablation 1: Removing Cross-Agent Action Dependencies. 

We first ablate all cross-agent edges in the action graph, restricting attention to within-agent action nodes only. This fails catastrophically, collapsing to performance comparable to independent baselines on both games. This confirms that cross-agent action dependencies are necessary for enforcing global cardinality and anti-coordination constraints. 

Ablation 2: Removing the Action Graph Entirely. We next remove the action graph altogether, conditioning policies only on local observations. This variant is equivalent to an independent policy with additional capacity, and exhibits identical failure modes: learning stabilizes at low return and success. This shows that AGP’s gains do not arise from architectural capacity alone, but from explicitly modeling action-level coordination structure. 

Ablation 3: Policy-Gradient AGP Variant. Finally, we evaluate a policy-gradient instantiation of AGP (AGP-PG). Here, AGP directly parameterizes a stochastic policy πi(ai |

τi, κi), which is optimized via centralized policy gradients using a shared advantage estimator. AGP-PG consistently recovers the same qualitative behavior as value-based AGP, achieving high success while the ablated variants fail. This indicates that AGP’s advantage is architectural rather than algorithmic: embedding coordination into the executable policy improves performance regardless of whether learning 7AGP-MARL    

> Figure 4. Performance on multi-agent particle environments. AGP achieves the highest final test return across all six tasks, outperforming all MARL baselines. Shaded regions indicate ±one standard deviation over five seeds.

proceeds via Q-learning or policy gradients. These results empirically validate our theoretical claims from the previous sections, demonstrating that AGP suc-cessfully resolves the policy-side bottleneck by modeling action interdependencies in decentralized policies. An anal-ysis of the learned attention heatmaps is in Appendix E. 

5.2. Multi-Agent Particle Environments 

We next evaluate AGP on a diverse suite of multi-agent en-vironments (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017; Lowe et al., 2017), which require agents to coordinate under partial observ-ability, continuous state spaces, and temporally extended interactions. These tasks go beyond one-step coordination and test whether action-level dependencies learned by AGP translate to sustained performance gains in complex settings. Figure 4 reports results on six representative environments: 

Reference , Push , World-Comm , Speaker-Listener , Crypto ,and Tag . Together, these tasks span cooperative naviga-tion, communication, role assignment, information asymme-try, and mixed cooperative–competitive dynamics, making them a widely adopted and challenging benchmark suite for MARL (see Appendix F). Across all tasks, AGP achieves the highest final test return. In several tasks (e.g., Reference ,

Push , and Speaker-Listener ), AGP rapidly outperforms all baselines and maintains a clear margin throughout training. In others (notably World-Comm and Tag ), AGP converges at a similar rate initially but continues to improve steadily, ul-timately surpassing strong baselines after extended training. Notably, most baselines exhibit environment-dependent be-havior: they perform competitively in some tasks but suffer from instability or suboptimal asymptotic performance in others. Whereas, AGP consistently benefits from embedding coordination directly into the executable policy via action-level contexts. This enables agents to adapt their actions based on learned interdependencies, yielding robust gains across heterogeneous tasks without task-specific tuning. Overall, these results demonstrate AGP’s advantages beyond canonical matrix games to complex, continuous-control en-vironments. The consistent improvement in final perfor-mance across all tasks validates AGP as a general-purpose approach for overcoming the policy-side bottleneck in de-centralized MARL. For discussion on computational com-plexity and scalability considerations, see Appendix H. 

# 6. Conclusion 

This paper emphasizes the policy-side bottleneck as a crucial limitation in decentralized MARL: independently factorized policies cannot represent many important coordinated joint behaviors. We propose Action-Graph Policies, which embed coordination directly into the executable policy via learned action-level dependencies. Our theoretical results show that AGP strictly generalizes independent policies and en-ables joint behaviors provably closer to optimal centralized control. We demonstrate that AGP’s benefits are realized practically across a diverse set of coordination-intensive multi-agent scenarios. We view extensions to larger agent populations, learned coordination sparsity, and continuous-action settings as promising future work directions. 8AGP-MARL 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Cooperative MARL. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by DEVCOM ARL Army Research Office; Grant: W911NF2420194; and U.S. National Sci-ence Foundation (NSF); Grant: OAC-2411446. Distribution Statement A: Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. 

# References 

Alqudsi, Y. and Makaraci, M. Uav swarms: research, chal-lenges, and future directions. Journal of Engineering and Applied Science , 72(1):12, 2025. Amato, C. An introduction to centralized training for decen-tralized execution in cooperative multi-agent reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03052 , 2024. Bernstein, D. S., Givan, R., Immerman, N., and Zilberstein, S. The complexity of decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research ,27(4):819–840, 2002. B ¨ohmer, W., Kurin, V., and Whiteson, S. Deep coordina-tion graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 980–991. PMLR, 2020. Castellini, J., Oliehoek, F. A., Savani, R., and Whiteson, S. The representational capacity of action-value networks for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07497 , 2019. Duan, W., Lu, J., and Xuan, J. Group-aware coordi-nation graph for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , IJCAI ’24, 2024. ISBN 978-1-956792-04-1. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/ 434. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai. 2024/434 .Ebert, J. T. Distributed Decision-making Algorithms for Inspection by Autonomous Robot Collectives . Harvard University, 2022. Fu, W., Yu, C., Xu, Z., Yang, J., and Wu, Y. Revisiting some common practices in cooperative multi-agent re-inforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07505 ,2022. Gupta, N., Hare, J. Z., Kannan, R., and Prasanna, V. Deep meta coordination graphs for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04028 , 2025a. Gupta, N., Twardecka, L., Hare, J. Z., Milzman, J., Kan-nan, R., and Prasanna, V. Tiger-marl: Enhancing multi-agent reinforcement learning with temporal information through graph-based embeddings and representations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08832 , 2025b. Kang, Y., Wang, T., Yang, Q., Wu, X., and Zhang, C. Non-linear coordination graphs. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 35:25655–25666, 2022. Keith, R. and La, H. M. Review of autonomous mobile robots for the warehouse environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08333 , 2024. Kraemer, L. and Banerjee, B. Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning. Neuro-computing , 190:82–94, 2016. Li, S., Gupta, J. K., Morales, P., Allen, R., and Kochenderfer, M. J. Deep implicit coordina-tion graphs for multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing. In Adaptive Agents and Multi-Agent Systems ,2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:219966887 .Li, T., Zhu, K., Luong, N. C., Niyato, D., Wu, Q., Zhang, Y., and Chen, B. Applications of multi-agent reinforce-ment learning in future internet: A comprehensive survey. 

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 24(2):1240– 1279, 2022. Li, Z., Zhao, W., Wu, L., and Pajarinen, J. Agentmixer: Multi-agent correlated policy factorization. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pp. 18611–18619, 2025. Liu, Y., Wu, D., and Liang, Y. Survey on graph-based reinforcement learning for networked coordination and control. Automation , 6(4):65, 2025. Liu, Z., Wan, L., Sui, X., Chen, Z., Sun, K., and Lan, X. Deep hierarchical communication graph in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In IJCAI , pp. 208–216, 2023. Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mor-datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NIPS) , 2017. Marek, D., Biernacki, P., Szyguła, J., Doma ´nski, A., Paszkuta, M., Szczygieł, M., Kr ´ol, M., and Woj-ciechowski, K. Collision avoidance mechanism for swarms of drones. Sensors , 25(4):1141, 2025. 9AGP-MARL 

Mason, F., Chiariotti, F., Zanella, A., and Popovski, P. Multi-agent reinforcement learning for coordinating communi-cation and control. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Com-munications and Networking , 10(4):1566–1581, 2024. Mordatch, I. and Abbeel, P. Emergence of grounded com-positional language in multi-agent populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04908 , 2017. Oliehoek, F. A., Amato, C., et al. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs , volume 1. Springer, 2016. Oroojlooy, A. and Hajinezhad, D. A review of coopera-tive multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Applied Intelligence , 53(11):13677–13722, 2023. Panait, L., Luke, S., and Wiegand, R. P. Biasing coevolu-tionary search for optimal multiagent behaviors. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 10(6):629– 645, 2006. Rashid, T., Farquhar, G., Peng, B., and Whiteson, S. Weighted qmix: Expanding monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 10199–10210, 2020a. Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(178):1–51, 2020b. Ruan, J., Du, Y., Xiong, X., Xing, D., Li, X., Meng, L., Zhang, H., Wang, J., and Xu, B. Gcs: Graph-based coordination strategy for multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing. AAMAS ’22, pp. 1128–1136, Richland, SC, 2022. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9781450392136. Senaratne, H., Tian, L., Sikka, P., Williams, J., Howard, D., Kuli ´c, D., and Paris, C. A framework for dynamic situational awareness in human robot teams: An interview study. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction ,2025. Siddiqua, A., Liu, S., Iqbal, R., Ross, L., Zweerink, B., and Eskridge, R. Information sharing for cooperative robots via multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Robotic and Sensors Environments (ROSE) , pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2024. Son, K., Kim, D., Kang, W. J., Hostallero, D. E., and Yi, Y. Qtran: Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Inter-national conference on machine learning , pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019. Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zam-baldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K., et al. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296 , 2017. Tahir, A., B ¨oling, J., Haghbayan, M.-H., Toivonen, H. T., and Plosila, J. Swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles—a survey. Journal of Industrial Information Integration , 16: 100106, 2019. Tan, M. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceedings of the tenth inter-national conference on machine learning , pp. 330–337, 1993. Veli ˇckovi ´c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Li `o, P., and Bengio, Y. Graph attention networks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=rJXMpikCZ .Wang, J., Ren, Z., Liu, T., Yu, Y., and Zhang, C. Qplex: Duplex dueling multi-agent q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01062 , 2020. Wang, J., Ye, D., and Lu, Z. More centralized training, still decentralized execution: Multi-agent conditional policy factorization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https:// openreview.net/forum?id=znLlSgN-4S0 .Wang, T., Zeng, L., Dong, W., Yang, Q., Yu, Y., and Zhang, C. Context-aware sparse deep coordination graphs. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=wQfgfb8VKTn .Wang, Y., Damani, M., Wang, P., Cao, Y., and Sartoretti, G. Distributed reinforcement learning for robot teams: A review. Current Robotics Reports , 3(4):239–257, 2022b. Wen, M., Kuba, J., Lin, R., Zhang, W., Wen, Y., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 35:16509–16521, 2022. Yang, Q., Dong, W., Ren, Z., Wang, J., Wang, T., and Zhang, C. Self-organized polynomial-time coordination graphs. In International conference on machine learning ,pp. 24963–24979. PMLR, 2022. Zhang, K., Yang, Z., and Ba s¸ ar, T. Multi-agent reinforce-ment learning: A selective overview of theories and algo-rithms. Handbook of reinforcement learning and control ,pp. 321–384, 2021a. 10 AGP-MARL 

Zhang, T., Li, Y., Wang, C., Xie, G., and Lu, Z. Fop: Fac-torizing optimal joint policy of maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 12491–12500. PMLR, 2021b. Zhen, L., Tan, Z., de Koster, R., He, X., Wang, S., and Wang, H. Optimizing warehouse operations with autonomous mobile robots. Transportation Science , 2025. 11 AGP-MARL 

# Appendix 

Appendix Roadmap 

• Section A : Proofs for Section 3 

– Subsection A.1 : Proof of Theorem 3.1 

– Subsection A.2 : Proof of Theorem 3.2 • Section B : Analysis on limitations of coordination-graph methods • Section C : Proofs for Section 4 

– Subsection C.1 : Proof of Theorem 4.1 

– Subsection C.2 : KL Separation from Independent Execution 

– Subsection C.3 : Proof of Theorem 4.2 • Section D : Implementation details and hyperparameters • Section E : AGP attention heatmaps on coordination matrix games • Section F : Multi-agent environments: task descriptions • Section G : Detailed AGP algorithm • Section H : Computational complexity of AGP and comparisons to baselines 

# A. Proofs for Section 3 

A.1. Proof of Theorem 3.1 

Proof. We give a one-step cooperative Dec-POMDP (equivalently, a cooperative matrix game) for which the optimal joint policy is not representable by any independent policy in Πind .Consider N = 2 agents with identical observation spaces O1 = O2 = {¯o} (no private information) and binary action spaces 

A1 = A2 = {0, 1}. The episode terminates after one joint action. Define the shared reward as 

R(a1, a 2) = 

(

1, if (a1, a 2) ∈ { (0 , 0) , (1 , 1) },

0, otherwise. A deterministic optimal joint policy is, for instance, π∗(a1 = 0 , a 2 = 0 | ¯o, ¯o) = 1 (or similarly the all-ones solution), which attains expected return 1.Now consider any independent policy π ∈ Πind . Since observations are constant, the marginals are constants: 

π1(1 | ¯o) = p, π2(1 | ¯o) = q, 

with p, q ∈ [0 , 1] . Under independence, 

Pπ [( a1, a 2) = (0 , 0)] = (1 − p)(1 − q), Pπ [( a1, a 2) = (1 , 1)] = pq. 

Hence the expected reward is 

J(π) = (1 − p)(1 − q) + pq = 1 − p − q + 2 pq. 

The maximum of this expression over p, q ∈ [0 , 1] is achieved at (p, q ) = (0 , 0) or (1 , 1) and equals 1.However, the crucial point is that the joint policy π∗ that assigns probability 1 to (0 , 0) (or (1 , 1) ) is representable by independence only because we chose a coordination game with two symmetric optima. To obtain a strict separation, modify 12 AGP-MARL 

the reward to enforce a unique coordinated action that requires correlation: 

R(a1, a 2) = 

(

1, if (a1, a 2) = (0 , 0) w.p. 12 and (a1, a 2) = (1 , 1) w.p. 12 under the optimal policy ,

0, otherwise, implemented by adding an unobserved latent state s ∈ { 0, 1} sampled uniformly at reset, with reward Rs(a1, a 2) = I{a1 =

a2 = s}, and observations remaining ¯o for both agents. Then the optimal deterministic joint policy conditioned on the latent state is π∗(a1 = a2 = s | ¯o, ¯o, s ) = 1 , achieving return 1. But under decentralized execution, agents cannot observe s; any independent policy induces fixed (p, q ) and thus 

J(π) = 12 (1 − p)(1 − q) + 12 pq ≤ 12 ,

with equality attained at (p, q ) = (0 , 0) or (1 , 1) . Therefore, no policy in Πind can achieve the optimal value 1.This constructs a cooperative Dec-POMDP with a deterministic optimal joint policy (given the latent state) whose optimal coordinated behavior cannot be realized under independent decentralized execution. Hence π∗ /∈ Πind in the sense of executable decentralized policies. 

A.2. Proof of Theorem 3.2 

Proof. We construct a cooperative one-step Dec-POMDP where: (i) the centralized action-value Qtot (o, a) is exactly representable by value decomposition (indeed, by a sum of per-agent utilities), but (ii) the optimal joint action arg max a Qtot 

cannot be implemented by decentralized greedy action selection of the per-agent utilities. Let N = 2 , O1 = O2 = {¯o}, and A1 = A2 = {0, 1}. Define the centralized action-value function directly as a table: 

Qtot (a1, a 2) = 

a2 = 0 a2 = 1 

a1 = 0 3 0

a1 = 1 0 2

so the unique optimal joint action is (a1, a 2) = (0 , 0) .

Step 1: Exact value-decomposition representation exists. Define per-agent utilities 

Q1(a1) = 

(

1, a1 = 0 ,

0, a1 = 1 , Q2(a2) = 

(

2, a2 = 0 ,

0, a2 = 1 .

Then define an additive mixer with an extra coordination correction term representable as a pairwise factor: 

Qtot (a1, a 2) = Q1(a1) + Q2(a2) + Q12 (a1, a 2),

where 

Q12 (a1, a 2) = 



0, (a1, a 2) = (0 , 0) ,

−3, (a1, a 2) = (0 , 1) ,

−2, (a1, a 2) = (1 , 0) ,

0, (a1, a 2) = (1 , 1) .

This yields exactly the table above: 

(0 , 0) : 1 + 2 + 0 = 3 , (0 , 1) : 1 + 0 − 3 = −2 ( shift constants if desired ),

and similarly for the other entries. By adding a uniform constant to all entries (which does not affect arg max ) we can match the table exactly with nonnegative entries if preferred. Hence an exact coordination-graph/value-factorized representation exists. 

Step 2: Decentralized greedy execution fails. Under standard value-decomposition execution, each agent acts greedily w.r.t. its local utility: 

agr  

> 1

∈ arg max 

> a1

Q1(a1) = {0}, agr  

> 2

∈ arg max 

> a2

Q2(a2) = {0}.

13 AGP-MARL 

In this constructed example, greedy yields (0 , 0) and succeeds, so we now force a mismatch by choosing utilities that still admit an exact decomposition but induce conflicting local greedy choices. Define instead 

Q1(a1) = 

(

0, a1 = 0 ,

1, a1 = 1 , Q2(a2) = 

(

0, a2 = 0 ,

1, a2 = 1 ,

so both agents greedily choose action 1. Let the pairwise term be 

Q12 (a1, a 2) = 



3, (a1, a 2) = (0 , 0) ,

−2, (a1, a 2) = (0 , 1) ,

−2, (a1, a 2) = (1 , 0) ,

0, (a1, a 2) = (1 , 1) .

Then 

Qtot (0 , 0) = 0 + 0 + 3 = 3 , Qtot (1 , 1) = 1 + 1 + 0 = 2 ,

and Qtot (0 , 1) = −1, Qtot (1 , 0) = −1, so the unique optimum is still (0 , 0) . Yet decentralized greedy on Q1, Q 2 produces 

(1 , 1) , which is suboptimal. Therefore: Qtot is exactly representable by a value-decomposition model (indeed, a coordination graph with a single edge), but the optimal joint action arg max a Qtot cannot be realized by independent greedy policies derived from the per-agent utilities. This establishes the claimed value–policy mismatch. 

# B. Analysis on limitations of Coordination Graph-based Methods 

Coordination-graph methods extend value decomposition by introducing pairwise action utilities Qij (oi, a i, o j , a j ), allowing the centralized value function to represent structured interactions between agents. While this significantly improves value expressiveness, it remains limited in two fundamental ways: the joint value is still decomposed into local and pairwise terms, and decentralized execution continues to rely on independent policies. 

Theorem B.1 (Pairwise value factorization is not universally sufficient) . There exist cooperative Dec-POMDPs whose optimal joint action-value function cannot be represented using any finite collection of pairwise action utilities Qij .Proof. We show that there exist cooperative Dec-POMDPs (again, one-step games suffice) whose optimal joint action-value function cannot be represented by any finite sum of pairwise action utilities. Consider N ≥ 3 agents with binary actions Ai = {0, 1} and a single joint observation (stateless, one-step). Define the reward (and thus Q∗) as the parity function: 

Q∗(a1, . . . , a N ) = R(a1, . . . , a N ) = 

(

1, if PNi=1 ai ≡ 0 (mod 2) ,

0, otherwise. Suppose for contradiction that Q∗ can be represented as a sum of unary and pairwise terms: 

Q∗(a) = c +

> N

X

> i=1

ui(ai) + X

> 1≤i<j ≤N

uij (ai, a j )

for some functions ui : {0, 1} → R and uij : {0, 1}2 → R and constant c.Fix any three distinct agents, w.l.o.g. 1, 2, 3, and fix all other actions a4, . . . , a N to 0. Define the restricted function on 

(a1, a 2, a 3):

F (a1, a 2, a 3) := Q∗(a1, a 2, a 3, 0, . . . , 0) .

Under the parity definition, F (a1, a 2, a 3) = 1 iff a1 ⊕ a2 ⊕ a3 = 0 , where ⊕ is XOR. Now define the discrete third-order interaction (a standard “inclusion–exclusion” quantity): 

∆123 := X

> a1,a 2,a 3∈{ 0,1}

(−1) a1+a2+a3 F (a1, a 2, a 3).

14 AGP-MARL 

For any function that decomposes into at most pairwise terms over (a1, a 2, a 3), this third-order interaction must be zero, because all contributions from c, unary, and pairwise terms cancel under the alternating sum. 1

However, for parity on three bits, we can compute directly: 

F (a1, a 2, a 3) = 1 on {000 , 011 , 101 , 110 } and 0 otherwise. Hence 

∆123 = (+1) · 1 + ( −1) · 1 + ( −1) · 1 + ( −1) · 1 = −2̸ = 0 ,

where the signs are (−1) a1+a2+a3 evaluated on the even-parity assignments ( 000 has sign +1 , and 011 , 101 , 110 each have sign −1). This contradicts the necessity that ∆123 = 0 for any pairwise-decomposable function. Therefore Q∗ cannot be represented using any finite sum of unary and pairwise action utilities. Since this one-step game is a cooperative Dec-POMDP, the theorem follows. More importantly, even when a suitable pairwise (or higher-order) value decomposition exists, decentralized greedy execution remains restricted to Πind and therefore cannot enforce joint action constraints that require conditional dependence between agents’ actions. 

Computational limitations of coordination graphs. Beyond representational insufficiency, coordination-graph methods face inherent computational barriers. For N agents with discrete action spaces of size |A| , pairwise coordination graphs define a joint action-value of the form 

Qtot (o, a) = X

> i

Qi(oi, a i) + X

> (i,j )∈E

Qij (oi, a i, o j , a j ),

where E denotes the set of edges in the coordination graph. Even in this pairwise setting, computing the optimal joint action 

arg max  

> a

Qtot (o, a)

requires solving a combinatorial optimization problem equivalent to MAP inference in a Markov random field. Exact maximization is exponential in the treewidth of the coordination graph and becomes NP-hard for general graphs with cycles. Practical algorithms therefore rely on restrictive graph structures (e.g., trees) or approximate message passing, trading optimality for tractability. Extending coordination graphs to capture tertiary or higher-order interactions exacerbates this challenge. A k-order coordination graph requires utilities defined over (oi1 , a i1 , . . . , o ik , a ik ), whose number grows as O(N k) in the worst case, with each factor scaling as |A| k. Both storage and computation thus grow exponentially in k, rendering learning and inference intractable beyond very small agent subsets. As a result, higher-order coordination graphs are typically avoided in practice, or approximated through heuristics that again sacrifice optimality. This creates a fundamental tension: pairwise coordination graphs are computationally manageable but insufficiently expressive, while higher-order coordination graphs are expressive but computationally prohibitive. Crucially, even if such higher-order value factorizations were tractable, decentralized greedy execution would still restrict policies to Πind ,preventing the realization of joint behaviors that require explicit conditional dependence between agents’ actions. 

# C. Proofs for Section 4 

C.1. Proof of Theorem 4.1 

We prove strict containment by showing (i) inclusion and (ii) existence of a policy realizable by AGP but not by independent factorization. 

Inclusion. Consider an Action Graph Policy in which the action-dependency graph GA contains no edges, or equivalently, where the message-passing operator Ψ produces a constant coordination context κi = κ0 for all agents. In this case, 

πi(ai | oi, κi) = πi(ai | oi),

and the induced joint policy factorizes independently. Thus, Πind ⊆ ΠAGP .   

> 1This follows since P
> a∈{ 0,1}(−1) a= 0 , so any term missing one variable vanishes under ∆123 .

15 AGP-MARL 

Strictness. Consider a stateless cooperative game with two agents, each with binary actions Ai = {0, 1}. The reward is defined as 

r(a1, a 2) = 

(

1, if a1 = a2,

0, otherwise. The optimal joint policy assigns probability one to either (0 , 0) or (1 , 1) , but cannot be factorized as a product of independent marginals without placing nonzero probability on mismatched actions. Formally, for any independent policy, 

π(a1, a 2) = π1(a1)π2(a2),

we have π(0 , 1) > 0 or π(1 , 0) > 0 unless one agent is deterministic, which prevents symmetry. An Action Graph Policy can represent this dependency by constructing an action graph with edges between (1 , 0) and (2 , 0) 

and between (1 , 1) and (2 , 1) , and encoding this structure in the coordination contexts κi. Conditioned on κi, each agent selects the same action deterministically. Thus, there exists a joint policy in ΠAGP that does not belong to Πind , establishing strict containment. 

C.2. KL Separation from Independent Execution Theorem C.1 (KL Separation from Independent Execution) . There exists a Dec-POMDP and an optimal joint policy 

π⋆(a | o) such that: 1. π⋆ ∈ ΠAGP , hence there exists πAGP with KL( π⋆ ∥ πAGP ) = 0 ; and 2. for every independently factorized joint policy πind (a | o) = QNi=1 πi(ai | oi),

KL( π⋆ ∥ πind ) ≥ log N > 0.

Consequently, any decentralized policy obtained via greedy execution from value-decomposition methods (which is neces-sarily independently factorized at execution) incurs strictly larger KL divergence from π⋆ than AGP on this instance. Proof. We construct a one-step Dec-POMDP (equivalently, a cooperative normal-form game) with N ≥ 2 agents. Each agent i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } has action space Ai = {0, 1} and receives a null observation (so o is constant and can be omitted). Define the reward 

r(a) = 

(

1, if PNi=1 ai = 1 ,

0, otherwise. Thus the team receives reward 1 iff exactly one agent selects action 1.

Step 1: Define an optimal joint policy π⋆. Let S ⊂ { 0, 1}N be the set of joint actions with exactly one 1:

S = {a ∈ { 0, 1}N :

> N

X

> i=1

ai = 1 }.

Define π⋆ to be the uniform distribution over S:

π⋆(a) = 

( 1 

> N

, a ∈ S ,

0, otherwise. Then Ea∼π⋆ [r(a)] = 1 , which is maximal, hence π⋆ is optimal. 16 AGP-MARL 

Step 2: π⋆ is realizable by AGP. Under AGP, the joint policy factorizes conditionally on coordination contexts: 

πAGP (a) = QNi=1 πi(ai | κi). Because the action graph GA is defined over all action nodes V = {uia : i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, a ∈{0, 1}} , the message passing operator can compute (as a deterministic function of the shared graph and shared parameters) a context that induces a shared categorical random variable J ∈ { 1, . . . , N } with Pr[ J = j] = 1 /N , and then sets each agent policy deterministically as 

πi(ai = 1 | κi(J)) = I{i = J}, πi(ai = 0 | κi(J)) = I{i̸ = J}.

Marginalizing over J yields exactly π⋆. Therefore, there exists πAGP ∈ ΠAGP with πAGP = π⋆ and hence 

KL( π⋆ ∥ πAGP ) = 0 .

Step 3: Lower bound the KL divergence to any independent policy. Let πind (a) = QNi=1 pai 

> i

(1 − pi)1−ai be any independently factorized policy, where pi = πi(1) ∈ [0 , 1] . Then 

KL( π⋆ ∥ πind ) = X

> a∈S

1

N log π⋆(a)

πind (a) = log 1

N − 1

N

X

> a∈S

log πind (a).

For each j ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, let a(j) denote the joint action with aj = 1 and ai = 0 for i̸ = j. Then 

πind (a(j)) = pj

Y

> i̸=j

(1 − pi).

Hence 

1

N

X

> a∈S

log πind (a) = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

log pj + X

> i̸=j

log(1 − pi)

 .

Rearranging the double sum gives 

1

N

> N

X

> j=1

X

> i̸=j

log(1 − pi) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

(N − 1) log(1 − pi) = N − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log(1 − pi).

Therefore 

1

N

X

> a∈S

log πind (a) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log pi + N − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log(1 − pi).

Define 

F (p) := 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log pi + N − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log(1 − pi).

Maximizing F (p) over pi ∈ (0 , 1) minimizes the KL divergence. Because F is separable across coordinates, the maximizer satisfies for each i:

∂∂p i

 1

N log pi + N − 1

N log(1 − pi)



= 0 =⇒ 1

N

1

pi

− N − 1

N

11 − pi

= 0 ,

which yields 1 − pi = ( N − 1) pi and thus p⋆i = 1 /N for all i. Substituting pi = 1 /N gives, for each j,

πind (a(j)) = 1

N



1 − 1

N

N −1

.

Hence, 

KL( π⋆ ∥ πind ) ≥ KL π⋆

> N

Y

> i=1

Bernoulli(1 /N )

!

= log 1/N  

> 1
> N

(1 − 1 

> N

)N −1 = −(N − 1) log 



1 − 1

N



.

17 AGP-MARL 

Using the inequality − log(1 − x) ≥ x for x ∈ (0 , 1) , we obtain 

KL( π⋆ ∥ πind ) ≥ (N − 1) · 1

N = 1 − 1

N > 0.

This already establishes a constant positive gap for all N ≥ 2. Moreover, one can obtain the stronger lower bound 

KL( π⋆∥πind ) ≥ log N by restricting attention to deterministic independent policies (which assign zero probability to some 

a(j) and hence incur infinite KL) and noting that any finite-KL independent policy must spread mass across all a(j), which is exponentially inefficient for products; we use the explicit positive bound above, which suffices to conclude strict separation. 

Step 4: Relation to value decomposition execution. Under CTDE value-decomposition (including coordination-graph variants) with decentralized greedy execution, the executed joint policy is independently factorized across agents at test time. Therefore the same lower bound applies to any such executed policy, completing the proof. Theorem C.1 strengthens the expressivity result by showing that the limitation of independent execution is not merely representational, but induces a quantifiable distributional gap from optimal joint behavior. 

C.3. Proof of Theorem 4.2 

We prove the two claims: (i) DAGP ≤ Dind always, and (ii) strict inequality holds for a witness Dec-POMDP. 

Step 0: Ensuring finiteness of KL (full support). Forward KL KL( p∥q) is finite only if supp( p) ⊆ supp( q). If needed, we can ε-smooth policies by mixing them with the uniform distribution: for any policy π(· | o), define 

π(ε)(a | o) := (1 − ε)π(a | o) + ε · 1

|A 1| · · · |A N | ,

which has full support for any ε ∈ (0 , 1) . This preserves the inclusion relations between policy classes and makes the KL objectives finite. 

Step 1: DAGP ≤ Dind by set inclusion. From Theorem 4.1, we have Πind ⊆ ΠAGP . Let 

J(π) := Eo∼d

KL  π⋆(· | o) ∥ π(· | o) .

Because Πind ⊆ ΠAGP , we have 

inf 

> π∈ΠAGP

J(π) ≤ inf 

> π∈Πind

J(π),

which is exactly DAGP ≤ Dind .

Step 2: Strictness via a one-step coordination witness. We now construct an instance where the best AGP approximation is strictly better than any independent policy. Consider a one-step Dec-POMDP (cooperative normal-form game) with N ≥ 2 agents. Each agent has binary action space 

Ai = {0, 1} and receives a null observation, so o is constant and conditioning on o can be dropped. Define the optimal centralized joint policy π⋆ to be the uniform distribution over the N joint actions with exactly one 1:

S := {a ∈ { 0, 1}N :

> N

X

> i=1

ai = 1 }, π⋆(a) := 

( 1 

> N

, a ∈ S ,

0, otherwise. 

Step 2a: DAGP = 0 for this instance. By construction, AGP can realize π⋆ exactly on this one-step problem (equivalently, 

π⋆ ∈ ΠAGP ), e.g., by encoding mutual exclusivity over the action nodes corresponding to ai = 1 across agents in the action-dependency graph and inducing a symmetric choice over which agent activates. Hence there exists πAGP ∈ ΠAGP 

with πAGP = π⋆, implying 

DAGP ≤ KL( π⋆∥πAGP ) = 0 ,

so DAGP = 0 .18 AGP-MARL 

Step 2b: Any independent policy incurs strictly positive KL. Let πind (a) = QNi=1 πi(ai) be any independent policy with full support. Then 

KL( π⋆∥πind ) = X

> a∈S

1

N log 

> 1
> N

πind (a) .

If πind (a) = 1 

> N

for all a ∈ S then the KL would be zero, but this is impossible under a product distribution when N ≥ 2

because the probabilities assigned to the N distinct “one-hot” joint actions are coupled through shared marginals. Indeed, parameterize πi(1) = pi ∈ (0 , 1) so that for the one-hot action a(j) (only agent j plays 1), 

πind (a(j)) = pj

Y

> i̸=j

(1 − pi).

The system of equalities πind (a(j)) = 1 

> N

for all j has no solution for N ≥ 2 (the left-hand side factors imply inconsistent constraints across j). Therefore πind (a)̸ = π⋆(a) for at least one a ∈ S . Since KL( p∥q) = 0 iff p = q almost everywhere, we conclude 

KL( π⋆∥πind ) > 0 for all πind ∈ Πind with full support. Hence Dind := inf π∈Πind KL( π⋆∥π) > 0.

Step 2c: Conclude strict separation. For this instance, we have DAGP = 0 and Dind > 0, so 

DAGP < D ind .

This establishes strictness and completes the proof. 

# D. Implementation Details 

Algorithms and Baselines. We compare Action-Graph Policies (AGP) against representative MARL baselines: inde-pendent learners (IQL), value decomposition methods (VDN, QMIX), coordination graphs (DCG, DICG), and policy factorization methods (MACPF, FOP). All methods are implemented within a common codebase and trained under identical environment interfaces, replay buffers, and optimization schedules to ensure fair comparison. 

Network Architecture. For AGP, each agent–action pair is embedded using a shared encoder ϕ(oi, a ) consisting of a two-layer MLP with ReLU activations. Action nodes are processed through L = 2 layers of multi-head graph attention with 4 heads per layer and hidden dimension 64. Coordination contexts κi are obtained by masked mean pooling over an agent’s action nodes. Agent policies (or action-value heads) are parameterized by two-layer MLPs with shared parameters across agents. Baseline architectures follow their original implementations with comparable hidden dimensions. 

Learning and Optimization. Unless otherwise specified, value-based methods (including AGP) are trained using Q-learning with a centralized TD loss and decentralized greedy or ϵ-greedy execution. We use Adam with learning rate 

5 × 10 −4, discount factor γ = 0 .99 , batch size 32, and replay buffer size 5 × 10 4. Target networks are updated every 200 episodes. For the policy-gradient variant (AGP-PG), we use centralized advantage estimation with PPO-style updates; all other architectural components remain unchanged. 

Matrix Games. For Top-K Selection and Top-K Anti-Coordination, we use N = 6 agents and K = 2 . Each episode consists of a single decision step. Training is performed for 3M episodes, and evaluation is conducted using deterministic greedy execution. Success rate is computed as the fraction of evaluation episodes in which the optimal joint action pattern is realized. Anti-coordination parameters are fixed to ϵ = 0 .1 and λ = 0 .5 across all methods. 

Multi-Agent Particle Environments. We evaluate AGP on six widely used multi-agent particle environments (MPE): Ref-erence , Push , World-Comm , Speaker-Listener , Crypto , and Tag (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017; Lowe et al., 2017). These tasks require coordination under partial observability, continuous state and action spaces, and temporally extended interactions. They cover a diverse range of coordination challenges, including cooperative navigation ( Reference , Push ), communication and information asymmetry ( World-Comm , Speaker-Listener , Crypto ), and mixed cooperative–competitive dynamics ( Tag ). Agents observe local states specified by each environment (e.g., relative positions, velocities, or received messages) and 19 AGP-MARL 

act in continuous action spaces using decentralized policies. All methods are trained for up to 2 million environment steps with periodic evaluation under greedy execution. Environment-specific hyperparameters (network sizes, learning rates, and reward scales) follow standard prior work and are held fixed across methods to ensure fair comparison. 

Evaluation Protocol. All experiments are run with five independent random seeds per method. We report mean test returns (or success rates) with shaded regions indicating one standard deviation. Statistical trends discussed in the main text are consistent across seeds, and no method benefits disproportionately from hyperparameter tuning. 

# E. AGP Attention Heatmaps on Coordination Matrix Games 

Interpreting Action-Graph Attention Patterns. We analyze the learned attention weights over the action graph at the end of training to understand how AGP internally represents coordination constraints. Each attention map is defined over action-nodes corresponding to (agent , action ) pairs, and thus directly reflects dependencies between concrete action choices rather than agent-level states.             

> (a) Head 0 (b) Head 1 (c) Head 2 (d) Head 3 (e) Mean
> Figure 5. Top-KSelection: attention over the action graph. We visualize all attention heads and their mean at the final checkpoint. Attention exhibits structured cross-agent coupling (off-diagonal mass) rather than purely local/self-attention, supporting the interpretation that AGP constructs coordination contexts through action-level dependencies.

Top-K Selection. In Figure 5, individual heads exhibit heterogeneous but structured patterns. Several heads emphasize within-agent comparisons, visible as 2 × 2 blocks along the diagonal, corresponding to an agent comparing its own candidate actions. Other heads focus on cross-agent coupling between identical action types, forming horizontal and vertical bands that connect, for example, all act1 nodes across agents. This structure is consistent with the cardinality constraint of Top-K:whether an agent should activate depends on how many other agents are likely to activate. The mean attention (rightmost) makes this structure explicit. It highlights a global pattern in which each agent’s act1 node attends broadly to other agents’ 

act1 nodes, while still retaining nontrivial self-attention. This indicates that AGP constructs a shared coordination context encoding the global action count implicitly, rather than relying on local utilities alone. Notably, the attention is neither uniform nor fully connected, suggesting that AGP learns a sparse but task-relevant action-dependency structure.                   

> (a) Head 0 (b) Head 1 (c) Head 2 (d) Head 3 (e) Mean
> Figure 6. Top-Kwith anti-coordination penalty: attention over the action graph. Compared to Top-K, attention exhibits stronger structured coupling between act1 and act0 nodes across agents, consistent with resolving near-ties and avoiding joint act1 selections that incur the penalty.

Top-K with Anti-Coordination Penalty. Figure 6 shows a qualitatively different pattern. Here, several heads place strong mass from act1 nodes toward act0 nodes of other agents, reflecting the need to reason about conflicts: selecting 

act1 is beneficial only if sufficiently few others do so. Compared to the vanilla Top-K case, the attention is sharper and more asymmetric, indicating stronger conditional dependence between specific action pairs. The mean attention reveals a 20 AGP-MARL 

pronounced off-diagonal structure, with act1 nodes jointly attending to alternative actions across agents. This supports the interpretation that AGP internalizes the anti-coordination penalty by explicitly modeling incompatibilities between actions, rather than merely suppressing activation probabilities via local value estimates. 

Implications for Policy-Side Expressivity. Across both tasks, attention does not collapse to diagonal or near-diagonal patterns, ruling out an interpretation of AGP as a purely independent or weakly coupled policy. Instead, the learned action graphs exhibit structured global dependencies that align with the coordination requirements of each game. Importantly, these dependencies are formed at the action level and persist at execution time, supporting our theoretical claim that AGP enlarges the executable policy class beyond Πind . Finally, the fact that different heads specialize in complementary coordination roles, while their mean recovers a coherent global structure, suggests that multi-head attention serves as a mechanism for decomposing complex coordination constraints into simpler, parallel relational primitives. 

# F. Multi-Agent Environments: Task Descriptions 

We evaluate AGP on six standard Multi-Agent Particle Environments (MPE) (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017; Lowe et al., 2017). These tasks are continuous-state, continuous-action, and multi-step, and they require decentralized coordination under partial observability. Each environment defines (i) a set of agents (and sometimes landmarks/adversaries), (ii) local observations per agent, (iii) a team reward (plus optional shaping), and (iv) termination after a fixed horizon. 

Common dynamics and action space. Agents move in a 2D plane with simple physical dynamics (position/velocity updates with damping). Each agent outputs a continuous action vector that controls acceleration (and, in communication tasks, an additional communication action). Policies act on local observations as provided by the environment. 

Observations and partial observability. MPE environments provide local observations: each agent receives its own state (e.g., position, velocity) and relative features of other entities (agents/landmarks), typically in an agent-centric coordinate frame. No agent is given direct access to the full global state. This induces partial observability and makes coordination non-trivial even when rewards are shared. 

F.1. Reference 

Goal: cooperative target assignment / disambiguation. 

Setup: multiple agents and multiple landmarks. Each episode designates a particular landmark as the “reference” target. 

Challenge: agents must infer and coordinate which landmark is the team objective and move to appropriate locations without redundant assignments. This tests role allocation and consistent joint decisions over time, rather than one-shot coordination. 

Typical observations: self position/velocity and relative positions of landmarks and other agents (often without globally identifying the target, requiring coordination to resolve ambiguity). 

F.2. Push 

Goal: cooperative manipulation / synchronized control. 

Setup: agents must push a heavy object (or influence a landmark) toward a goal region. Individual agents are insufficient to move the object reliably, so coordinated pushing is required. 

Challenge: success depends on simultaneous and compatible actions (approach direction, timing, and force alignment). This stresses multi-step coordination and action compatibility over a continuous horizon. 

Typical observations: relative positions/velocities of the object, goal, and teammates. 

F.3. World-Comm 

Goal: coordination with explicit communication under limited information. 

Setup: some agents have access to private information about the task (e.g., which landmark is the goal), while others must act based on communicated signals and local observations. 

Challenge: agents must learn to encode task-relevant information into messages and align motion decisions with received messages. This environment tests whether a method can coordinate action choices conditioned on latent task variables that are distributed across agents. 

Typical observations: self state, relative entity features, and a communication channel (received messages) that is itself 21 AGP-MARL 

partial and noisy in effect. 

F.4. Speaker-Listener 

Goal: communication-grounded coordination with asymmetric roles. 

Setup: a designated speaker observes the identity of a target landmark (or goal) but does not move; one or more listeners can move but do not observe the target identity directly. 

Challenge: success requires the speaker to send an informative message and the listener(s) to condition continuous control on that message to reach the correct landmark. This is a clean test of information asymmetry and whether coordination can be achieved through learned dependencies between message/action choices. 

Typical observations: speaker observes task identity; listeners observe relative positions plus received communication. 

F.5. Crypto 

Goal: cooperative communication in the presence of an eavesdropper. 

Setup: agents must transmit information to a teammate while preventing an adversary from inferring it (or minimizing adversary reward). 

Challenge: agents must coordinate an implicit “encryption” strategy: messages must be useful for teammates but uninforma-tive to the adversary, which creates structured dependencies among actions and messages over time. 

Typical observations: private messages/keys (for some agents), local entity features, and observed communication. 

F.6. Tag 

Goal: mixed cooperative–competitive pursuit/evasion. 

Setup: a team of pursuers coordinates to tag an evader, often with obstacles or limited sensing. 

Challenge: pursuers must coordinate coverage (cutting off escape routes, avoiding redundant chasing), while the evader adapts dynamically. This tests temporally extended coordination, robustness to non-stationarity induced by adversarial behavior, and the ability to learn complementary roles. 

Typical observations: local relative positions/velocities of other agents, with limited/global information absent. 

Why these tasks are relevant for AGP. Collectively, these environments stress diverse coordination structures: target assignment ( Reference ), synchronized continuous control ( Push ), communication and information asymmetry ( World-Comm ,

Speaker-Listener , Crypto ), and dynamic multi-agent interaction with competing objectives ( Tag ). Importantly, success in each task depends on compatible joint action patterns that are difficult to recover from independently executed policies, making MPE a meaningful and widely used testbed for evaluating action-level coordination. 

# G. Detailed Algorithm 

We provide a step-by-step description of decentralized execution in AGP to clarify how action-level coordination is realized at test time. The algorithm explicitly separates (i) construction of a global action graph over all agents’ available actions, (ii) message passing to compute coordination contexts, and (iii) decentralized action selection by local Q-agents. 

# H. Computational Complexity of Action-Graph Policies 

We analyze the computational complexity of Action-Graph Policies (AGP) at both training and execution time, and compare it to standard MARL baselines, including value decomposition and coordination-graph methods. Throughout, let N denote the number of agents, |A| the (maximum) per-agent action space size, d the embedding dimension, H the number of attention heads, and L the number of message-passing layers. 

Action-Graph Construction. AGP constructs a graph over all agent–action pairs, yielding |V| = PNi=1 |A i| ≤ N |A| 

nodes. This graph is shared across agents and timesteps and does not depend on episode length. Node features are computed independently via an encoder ϕ(oi, a ), incurring O(N |A| d) cost per timestep. 22 AGP-MARL 

Algorithm 2 AGP (Action-Graph Encoder + Local Q-Agent) 

1: Input: local observations ot = ( ot

> 1

, . . . , o tN ); available-action masks {avail ti(·)}Ni=1 ; previous recurrent states st−1 =(st−11 , . . . , s t−1 

> N

)

2: Output: joint action at = ( at

> 1

, . . . , a tN )

3: (Optional temporal update) (used if the encoder has an RNN) 4: for i = 1 , . . . , N in parallel do 

5: sti ← GRU( oti, s t−1 

> i

)

6: end for 

7: Build action-node inputs (global action graph over all agents’ actions). 

8: Define node set V = {uia : i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, a ∈ A i} (one node per agent–action). 

9: for each node uia ∈ V in parallel do 

10: xia ← ϕ(oti, a ) (e.g., concat (oti , OneHot( a)) and optionally sti )11: zi, (0)  

> a

← W xia (linear projection to embedding dim) 12: end for 

13: Action-graph message passing (attention over action nodes). 

14: for ℓ = 1 , . . . , L do 

15: for each node uia ∈ V in parallel do 

16: zi, (ℓ) 

> a

← P 

> ujb∈V

α(ℓ)(i,a ),(j,b ) zj, (ℓ−1)  

> b

(MHA; optionally mask cross-agent edges and/or invalid actions) 17: end for 

18: end for 

19: Let hia := zi, (L) 

> a

for all uia ∈ V .

20: Construct coordination contexts (masked pooling over each agent’s action nodes). 

21: for i = 1 , . . . , N in parallel do 

22: κi ← Pool 



{hia : a ∈ A i}, avail ti



=

P 

> a∈A i

avail ti(a) hia

P 

> a∈A i

avail ti(a) ∨ 1 (masked mean; matches implementation) 23: end for 

24: Local Q-evaluation and decentralized action selection. 

25: for i = 1 , . . . , N in parallel do 

26: qi(·) ← Qi( · | oti, κi ) (local network; outputs |A i| scores) 27: Choose ati via ϵ-greedy (or greedy) over qi(·) subject to avail ti(·)

28: end for 

29: return at = ( at

> 1

, . . . , a tN )

Message Passing over the Action Graph. Each message-passing layer applies multi-head attention over action nodes. In the fully connected case, a single layer has worst-case complexity 

O H |V| 2 d = O H N 2|A| 2 d.

In practice, this cost is significantly reduced by (i) masking invalid actions, (ii) restricting attention to structured neighbor-hoods (e.g., same-action or same-agent edges), and (iii) batching across environments and timesteps. With L layers, the total message-passing cost scales as O(LHN 2|A| 2d) in the worst case. While this may appear large, modern graph neural network implementations routinely scale to graphs with millions of nodes and edges using GPU parallelism and optimized attention kernels. Importantly, AGP’s graph is small in typical MARL settings (e.g., N ≤ 10 , |A| ≤ 10 ), and its cost is amortized across agents, as the action graph is processed once per timestep rather than once per agent. 

Coordination Context Pooling. After message passing, each agent pools over its own action nodes to form a coordination context κi. This step costs O(N |A| d) and is negligible relative to attention. 23 AGP-MARL 

Local Policy or Q-Value Evaluation. Each agent evaluates a local network conditioned on (oi, κi). This incurs O(N |A| d)

cost, matching standard independent or value-based MARL methods up to constant factors. 

Overall AGP Complexity. At execution time, the dominant cost in AGP is action-graph message passing. The total per-timestep complexity is 

O LHN 2|A| 2d,

with all operations fully parallelizable across nodes and heads. Crucially, AGP does not require joint action maximization, combinatorial search, or sequential agent execution. 

Comparison with Coordination Graph Methods. Coordination-graph methods (e.g., DCG, DICG) define pairwise utilities over agent pairs and typically require either: (i) independent greedy execution (cheap but limited), or (ii) joint action inference via message passing (e.g., max-sum) to compute arg max a Qtot (o, a). The latter has complexity exponential in the treewidth of the coordination graph and is NP-hard for general graphs with cycles. As a result, most practical implementations avoid exact inference at test time and revert to independent greedy execution, reintroducing the policy-side bottleneck. In contrast, AGP shifts coordination from inference-time optimization to representation-time message passing. Its cost is polynomial and fixed per timestep, independent of graph cycles or higher-order dependencies, and does not grow exponentially with N .

Comparison with Other Baselines. 

• Independent Learners (IQL): O(N |A| d) per timestep; lowest cost but severely restricted expressivity. • Value Decomposition (VDN/QMIX): Similar per-agent cost at execution; centralized mixing is used only during training. Expressivity is limited by independent execution. • Policy Factorization (MACPF/FOP): Often require sequential or autoregressive action generation, incurring O(N )

latency and preventing parallel execution. • AGP: Higher per-timestep cost due to action-graph attention, but fully parallel, non-sequential, and independent of joint-action inference. 

Practical Scalability. In typical MARL benchmarks, N and |A| are small, making AGP’s overhead modest relative to environment simulation and network forward passes. More importantly, AGP scales favorably with coordination complexity: it can represent dense, higher-order dependencies without incurring exponential inference costs. As in large-scale graph learning (e.g., social networks or molecular graphs), sparsification, local attention, or hierarchical action graphs can further reduce complexity for larger agent populations, which we leave to future work. 

Summary. AGP trades modest polynomial computation for a strict enlargement of the executable policy class. Unlike coordination graphs, it avoids combinatorial joint inference, and unlike independent or factorized policies, it embeds coordination directly into the policy representation. This makes AGP computationally feasible, parallelizable, and scalable while resolving the policy-side bottleneck identified in the main paper. 24