Title: Training Generalizable Collaborative Agents via Strategic Risk Aversion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.21515v2

Published Time: Mon, 02 Mar 2026 01:30:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Training Generalizable Collaborative Agents via Strategic Risk Aversion 

## Chengrui Qu вҲ—

## Caltech Yizhou Zhang вҲ—

## Caltech Nicolas Lanzetti вҲ—

## Caltech Eric Mazumdar вҲ—

## Caltech March 2, 2026 

Abstract 

Many emerging agentic paradigms require agents to collaborate with one another (or people) to achieve shared goals. Unfortunately, existing approaches to learning policies for such collaborative problems produce brittle solutions that fail when paired with new partners. We attribute these failures to a combination of free-riding during training and a lack of strategic robustness . To address these problems, we study the concept of strategic risk aversion and interpret it as a principled inductive bias for generalizable cooperation with unseen partners. While strategically risk-averse players are robust to deviations in their partnerвҖҷs behavior by design, we show that, in collaborative games, they also (1) can have better equilibrium outcomes than those at classical game-theoretic concepts like Nash, and (2) exhibit less or no free-riding. Inspired by these insights, we develop a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithm that integrates strategic risk aversion into standard policy optimization methods. Our empirical results across collaborative benchmarks (including an LLM collaboration task) validate our theory and demonstrate that our approach consistently achieves reliable collaboration with heterogeneous and previously unseen partners across collaborative tasks. 

Keywords: Strategic risk aversion, multi-agent reinforcement learning, partner generalization 

# 1 Introduction 

AI systems increasingly operate in multi-agent environments, where success depends on effective interaction with other agents. An increasingly important subset of these problems involves agents solving collaborative tasks вҖ”i.e., tasks where agents must work together towards a shared goal. Examples of such problems range from robots coordinating with people in shared physical spaces like warehouses (Kruse et al., 2013), to emerging вҖңagentic AIвҖқ problems where multiple models collaborate to write code (Wu et al., 2024) or solve math problems (Cemri et al., 2025). A common approach to such problems is to view them as collaborative games and use concepts from game theory to design algorithms to learn collaborative policies (Dafoe et al., 2021). Viewed through this lens, a central challenge in collaborative games is partner generalization вҖ”where one seeks to maintain effective interaction across new sets of partners (Carroll et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Ruhdorfer et al., 2025). Indeed, in many real-world settings, agents must navigate situations in which they interact with different partners (either algorithmic or human) who may have slightly different goals, heuristics, or levels of competence. Agents should learn strategies that work well across a broad range of partners without sacrificing performance. Unfortunately, current approaches tend to struggle with thisвҖ”with learned policies often failing to generalize to new partners (Stone et al., 2010), or overfitting to other agentsвҖҷ eccentricities and becoming overly reliant on specific conventions (Carroll et al., 2019; Lerer and Peysakhovich, 2019). We view the problem of partner generalization as ultimately a question of robustness of the learned policy and of alignment between agents (Leibo et al., 2017). The need for robustness emerges from the requirement that learned strategies be insensitive to changes in a partnerвҖҷs strategy and degrade gracefully in performance 

> вҲ—Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.

1

> arXiv:2602.21515v2 [cs.LG] 27 Feb 2026

as the partners become less collaborative. The need for alignment emerges from a desire to find agents that contribute proportionally to the task. If agents learn to under-contribute or delegate costly actions (Liu et al., 2023; Sunehag et al., 2018) to their partnersвҖ”effectively free-riding on their partnerвҖҷs effortвҖ”they cannot generalize to new environments and partners. While free-riding is a widely acknowledged phenomenon in game theory, it is rarely studied as a problem in collaborative multi-agent learning despite recent empirical evidence that it arises even with large AI models (Zhang et al., 2025). Prior workвҖ”which we review in Section 2 and then in depth in Appendix AвҖ”has studied partner generalization in specific settings that fail to scale to large-scale problems like the post-training of LLM agents (Hu et al., 2020) or via largely heuristic approaches (Forkel and Foerster, 2025). In contrast, in this paper we advance strategic risk aversion as a principled and scalable approach to addressing this issue in a broad class of collaborative games. Recently proposed in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to derive human-like strategies in general games (Mazumdar et al., 2024), strategic risk aversion mirrors behaviors observed in people in experimental economics (Goeree et al., 2003). Unlike many approaches to robustness or risk aversion in MARL which primarily focus on robustness to uncertainty in the underlying environment, strategic risk aversion posits that agents should be risk-averse to uncertainty stemming from their opponentsвҖҷ decisions. This perspective inherently aligns with the goal of partner generalization, as it forces agents to be robust to deviations in their partnerвҖҷs play. Formalizing this principle leads to a new equilibrium concept: (Strategically) Risk-Averse Quantal Response Equilibria (RQE) (Mazumdar et al., 2024). While RQE has been shown to better capture human play in simple experiments and offer better computational tractability (Zhang and Mazumdar, 2025) than classic game theoretic concepts, its potential for collaborative games and partner generalization remains unknown. We argue that strategic risk aversion provides a suitable inductive bias for robust cooperation in collaborative games: at an RQE, an agent is trained against a structured set of plausible partner deviations, governed by the agentвҖҷs degree of risk aversion. This ensures strategies are robust without being overly conservative. 

Contributions: Through both a theoretical analysis of RQE in structured collaborative games and extensive experiments across a range of diverse multi-agent benchmarks, we validate that RQE are particularly suited for collaborative tasks. In particular, our contributions are as follows: 

вҖў Incentivizing collaboration (Theorem 4.1): We prove that in continuous quadratic aggregative games, strategic risk aversion can encourage collaboration, with higher risk aversion leading to a greater focus on the shared goal. This implies a counterintuitive result: unlike in classic robust optimization or RL, robustness does not necessarily require sacrificing performance .

вҖў Alleviating free-riding (Theorem 4.5): We prove in finite-action collaborative games with private costs that strategic risk aversion can mitigate free-riding at equilibrium. Thus, risk aversion can reduce the alignment problem in collaborative MARL. 

вҖў Scalable risk-averse MARL algorithms: We develop Strategically Risk-Averse Policy Optimization 

(SRPO), a MARL algorithm that optimizes an RQE-derived objective which integrates naturally with policy-optimization algorithms like independent proximal policy optimization (IPPO). 

вҖў Empirical validation: We demonstrate across collaborative MARL benchmarks that SRPO consis-tently achieves more reliable coordination with heterogeneous and unseen partners than IPPO (the current scalable MARL baseline). We observe that while IPPO performs well, it consistently finds free-riding equilibria that limit its generalization. In contrast, we observeвҖ”in line with our theoryвҖ”that RQE found by SRPO exhibit no free-riding and result in better partner generalization. We also provide preliminary small-scale experiments showing that these findings can even extend to the fine-tuning of collaborative agentic AI teams made up of large language models, demonstrating the scalability of our approach. 

# 2 Related Works 

Our work studies strategic risk aversion in collaborative MARL. We cover the most relevant related work here and defer a more in depth discussion to Appendix A. 2The most related literature in collaborative MARL focuses on the partner generalization problem; i.e., how to learn collaborative policies that remain effective when paired with previously unseen partners (Barrett et al., 2014; Carroll et al., 2019; DizdareviДҮ et al., 2025). This is sometimes referred to as zero-shot coordination (Hu et al., 2021, 2020), or ad-hoc teamwork problem (Stone et al., 2010). One large class of approaches can broadly be described as population-based methods (Lupu et al., 2021; Rahman et al., 2023; Vinyals et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) in which one trains against a diverse set of learned policiesвҖ”essentially performing domain randomization for partners. Though such approaches are conceptually simple, the task of generating good populations of partners is nontrivial and typically relies on heuristic, task-dependent design choices. Furthermore, such approaches quickly become computationally intractable for complex, high-dimensional settings (e.g., LLM fine-tuning) and tend not to have strong guarantees that they result in better generalization. To circumvent this limitation, Forkel and Foerster (2025) attempt to induce robustness by introducing more randomness during training (by increasing entropy regularization in policy optimization). Though this method scales well, our experiments demonstrate that it does not solve free-riding and consequently does not address the problem of generalization across collaborative tasks. In contrast, our approach based on strategic risk aversion scales as a simple modification to existing policy-optimization techniques, is grounded in a principled game theoretic formulation, and empirically consistently delivers more stable cross-play performance across collaborative benchmarks. While these forms of risk aversion have been well studied in the experimental economics literature (Goeree et al., 2003; Goeree and Offerman, 2002; Gollier, 2001), they have only recently been studied in theory (Lanzetti et al., 2025b; Mazumdar et al., 2024) and in MARL (Slumbers et al., 2023; Zhang and Mazumdar, 2025). We demonstrate its potential in collaborative games. 

# 3 Problem Setup 

We consider a general-sum collaborative game with N players. Each player i вҲҲ [N ] is endowed with actions 

ai вҲҲ A i, where the action spaces can be discrete or continuous, and we use the notation AвҲ’i = Q  

> jМё=i

Aj for the action space of all players except i. Each player aims to maximize a utility function ui : Ai Г— A вҲ’i вҶ’ R.The utility function consists of a shared reward R, which coincides for all players, and a private cost ci, so that 

ui(ai, a вҲ’i) = R(a1, . . . , a N ) вҲ’ ci(ai).

These games are collaborative since all players seek to maximize the reward, but pay for their own effort. They have been well studied in economics under the guise of public goods games and naturally model many real-world scenarios where players aim to collaboratively accomplish a task but are penalized for their own effort. The players select a mixed strategy xi вҲҲ вҲҶ( Ai), which is a probability over the available actions Ai

(here, вҲҶ( Ai) is the set of probability distributions over Ai). In the standard game-theoretic setting, the utility of each player is then the standard risk-neutral expected utility 

Ui(xi, x вҲ’i) = E a1вҲјx1 

> ... aNвҲјxN

[ui(ai, a вҲ’i)] ,

where xвҲ’i is the collection of the mixed strategies of all other players jМё = i.In this work, we follow Mazumdar et al. (2024) and propose to introduce two elements of human decision-making: risk aversion and bounded rationality. 

Risk aversion To model risk aversion, we consider players that seek to optimize a risk-adjusted utility based on the entropic risk measure with risk aversion parameter П„i > 0 (e.g., see FГ¶llmer and Schied (2002)), instead of their expected utility. PlayersвҖҷ resulting objectives are given by 

U П„i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i) = inf  

> pвҲҲвҲҶ( AвҲ’i)

Ui(xi, p ) + 1

П„i

KL( p, x вҲ’i). (1) In words, the utility results from a worst-case approach, in which a fictitious adversary tries to inflict maximum damage at the (risk-neutral) expected utility, while not deviating вҖңtoo muchвҖқ from the strategies of all other players. For the sake of this paper, we will measure this deviation with the KL divergence, defined 3as KL (p, q ) = P 

> j

pj log 

 pj

> qj



(when AвҲ’i is discrete) and KL (p, q ) = R 

> Rn

ПҒp(x) log 

 ПҒp(x) 

> ПҒq(x)



(when AвҲ’i = Rn is continuous), where ПҒp and ПҒq are the densities of p and q (provided they exist, else KL (p, q ) = + вҲһ). Our choice of the entropic risk measure is rooted in operations research, but also motivated by ubiquitous use of the KL divergence across machine learning and in particular in policy optimization in reinforcement learning. By focusing on the KL divergence, we derive algorithms that can be implemented with minimal changes to existing codebases. 

Bounded rationality To incorporate bounded rationality, we add entropy to each playerвҖҷs utility, so that their utility is 

U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i) = U П„i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i) вҲ’ ПөiH(xi), (2) where Пөi > 0 and H(xi) is the (negative) entropy of the mixed strategy xi; i.e., H(p) = P 

> j

pj log( pj ) (if Ai is discrete) and H(p) = R 

> Rn

ПҒp(x) log( ПҒp(x)) dx (when Ai = Rn is continuous), where ПҒp is again the density of 

p (provided it exists, else H(p) = + вҲһ). Entropy regularization of the utility leads to the celebrated quantal response model in behavioral economics (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995) and is widely employed in machine learning for exploration purposes (e.g., see Ahmed et al. (2019)). For more general regularization schemes, we refer to Mazumdar et al. (2024). 

Risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE). Given our new utility U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i), we now define a RQE as a set of joint mixed strategies from which no player has an incentive to unilaterally deviate: 

Definition 3.1 (Mazumdar et al. (2024), Definition 5) . A tuple of mixed strategies (xвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , x вӢҶN ) is a risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE) with degrees of risk aversion П„1, . . . , П„ N and bounded rationality Пө1, . . . , Пө N if for all players i we have 

U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вӢҶ

> вҲ’i

) вүӨ U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xвӢҶi , x вӢҶ

> вҲ’i

) вҲҖ xi вҲҲ вҲҶ( Ai). (3) When П„i, Пө i вҶ’ 0 we recover Nash equilibria, when П„i вҶ’ 0 we recover quantal response equilibria, and when Пө вҶ’ 0 and П„ вҶ’ вҲһ we recover security strategies. In the next section, we investigate the benefits of risk aversion, together with bounded rationality, in two classes of collaborative games: aggregative continuous quadratic games and finite symmetric collaborative games. These insights prompt us, in the subsequent section, to use RQE for the design of algorithms to train collaborative agents in MARL. 

# 4 вҖңFree-LunchвҖқ Theorems for Strategic Risk Aversion in Collabora-tive Games 

We first study strategic risk aversion in simple, structured classes of collaborative games which are more tractable to analyze than complex MARL problems we design algorithms for. We prove two вҖңfree-lunchвҖқ theorems that illustrate how strategic risk aversion can (1) increase collaboration and (2) mitigate free ridingвҖ”both of which are essential to the task of partner generalization. These results serve as a principled rationale for incorporating strategic risk aversion into MARL. We empirically observe both these properties across our experiments in Section 6, validating that our insights extend beyond structured games. 

## 4.1 Strategic Risk Aversion can Induce Collaboration 

Our first setting lies in continuous ( A = Rn) quadratic aggregative games, popular in economics (CorchГіn, 1994) and control theory (Paccagnan et al., 2018). In line with our collaborative setting, we write the utility of each player as the difference between a shared reward that depends on the aggregate action a1 + . . . + aN ,so that 

R(a1, . . . , a N ) = 12

* NX

> i=1

ai, H 

> N

X

> i=1

ai

+

+

*

h, 

> N

X

> i=1

ai

+

,

4Figure 1: (i). Expected utility of each player as a function of the degree of risk aversion П„ at equilibrium, when Пө = 1 in Example 4.2. PlayerвҖҷs utilities can first increase with risk aversion before decreasing due to over-conservatism, meaning that strategic risk aversion can yield better performing equilibria than Nash or QRE. (ii). Probability that a player collaborates at a RQE as a function of the level of risk aversion, for Пө = 0 .2 for the game in Example 4.6. Strategic risk aversion alleviates free riding entirely after a given threshold (i.e., Оҙ вҶ’ 0) as our theory predicts. for some H negative definite and h of appropriate dimensions, and a private cost that only depends on the playerвҖҷs own action ai, of the form ci(ai) = ПҒi 

> 2

вҲҘaiвҲҘ2 for ПҒi > 0. For simplicity of exposition, we assume here that all players have the same degree of risk aversion П„i and bounded rationality Пөi, and the same ПҒi.Nevertheless, as we show in the Appendix B.1, all results extend to the case where these are player-dependent. Being a continuous game, the computation of an RQE is infinite dimensional, as it involves searching over mixed strategies over continuous action spaces. In Proposition B.3 in the appendix, however, we bypass this complexity by showing that there is a unique Gaussian RQE (i.e., RQE where mixed strategies are Gaussian) that can be computed efficiently. This effectively allows us to study the effect of risk aversion on the expected shared reward J(П„ ) := EaiвҲјxвӢҶi (П„ ) [R(a1, . . . , a N )] .

Remarkably, as we show in the next theorem (proven in Appendix B.1), this function is strictly increasing. That is, risk monotonically increases the shared reward and thus induces collaboration between the players. 

Theorem 4.1 (risk induces collaboration) . Let xвӢҶi (П„ ) be the Gaussian mixed strategy of player i at the unique Gaussian RQE of the game, as a function of the degree of risk aversion П„ . Then, the expected shared reward П„ 7 вҶ’ J(П„ ) is strictly increasing 1. That is, players contribute more to the shared reward as they become more risk-averse. 

This increasing contribution to the shared reward generally entails an increase in the playersвҖҷ private cost. Thus, in practice, we observe a tradeoff between being risk neutral ( П„ вҶ’ 0) and more risk-averse ( П„ large) with large personal cost but large shared reward. In a one-dimensional example, we can study this tradeoff analytically. 

Example 4.2. Consider two robots that move an object from the origin to a target location ВҜa. Each robot exerts a force ai, so that the total force is a1 + a2. Players incur a penalty for their own actuation effort. Thus, the shared reward is вҲ’ 12 (a1 + a2 вҲ’ ВҜa)2 and the personal cost is 12 a2 

> i

(with ПҒi = 1 for simplicity). In this case, the Gaussian RQE has mean mвӢҶi (П„ ) = ВҜa 

> 3вҲ’П„ Пө

and variance ОЈi = Пө 

> 2

. The equilibrium expected reward is concave in П„ as shown in Fig. 1, highlighting that risk aversion can yield higher utilities. 

Remark 4.3 . We refer to Theorem 4.1 as a вҖңfree-lunch" theorem because it suggests that one can add risk aversion into a game and not incur a loss in performance. This can be observed in Fig. 1(i) in which equilibrium utility increases from a risk-neutral baseline before decreasing again. This is in stark contrast to single-agent RL or classic robust optimization where robustness necessitates sacrificing performance. We validate our theory in broader classes of games in Section 6 and observe that, in some games, some degree of strategic risk aversion can increase collaboration and performance over a risk-neutral baseline. In     

> 1The function is strictly increasing on the domain of П„where RQE are well-defined, that is, when the risk parameters П„is вҖңnot too largeвҖқ; else, risk diverges to infinity. For details, we refer the reader to the appendix and, in particular, to (14).

5other games, however, the structure is less amenable to such phenomena, and we observe that risk aversion introduces conservatism and a corresponding decrease in performance. 

## 4.2 Strategic Risk Aversion Alleviates Free-riding 

We now prove a second вҖңfree-lunchвҖқ theorem associated with strategic risk aversion in collaborative games, namely that players who are strategically risk-averse will free-ride less at equilibrium. We prove this result in the context of 2-player collaborative finite symmetric games played over the probability simplex. These are games in which player i = 1 , 2вҖҷs utility is given by 

Ui(x1, x 2) = Ea1вҲјx1,a 2вҲјx2 [R(a1, a 2)] вҲ’ EaiвҲјxi [c(ai)] ,

where R is a symmetric ( R(a1, a 2) = R(a2, a 1)) shared reward, c is a private cost, and xi are strategy vectors in the probability simplex in Rn. Although the game is symmetric, equilibria can be asymmetric and thus exhibit free-riding вҖ”i.e., one player can exert significantly less effort at equilibrium while still enjoying high utility. As we observe across our experiments, free-riding equilibria are ubiquitous across many MARL benchmarks and pose a significant challenge to the generalization of agentsвҖҷ strategies. Concretely, we define free riding in our game as follows. 

Definition 4.4 (free-riding) . An RQE (x1, x 2) вҲҲ вҲҶ( A) Г— вҲҶ( A) exhibits free-riding with degree Оҙ вүҘ 0 if the difference in costs paid by each player at the RQE is Оҙ; i.e., |Ea1вҲјx1 [c(a1)] вҲ’ Ea2вҲјx2 [c(a2)] | = Оҙ. If 

Оҙ = 0 , the RQE does not exhibit free-riding. The following theorem shows that as a playerвҖҷs degree of risk aversion increases, free-riding becomes less prevalent. 

Theorem 4.5 (risk removes free-riding) . There exists a game-dependent constant C depending only on R,

c, and the degree of bounded rationality Пө such that if playerвҖҷs degrees of risk aversion П„ in a two-player collaborative game satisfy П„ > CОҙ2 , then the game can admit no RQE with degree of free-riding greater than 

Оҙ.

This theorem (proven in Appendix B.2) shows that as strategic risk aversion increases, RQE must exhibit less free-riding. The intuition for this result is as follows: suppose that player i free-rides at a RQE. If they become risk-averse, the worst-case deviation for their opponent is simply to stop putting any effort into the game. Since player i is free-riding and not putting their own effort, this deviation causes a large drop in performance. Thus, at a risk-averse equilibrium, a player must contribute some of their own effort. We validate this intuition in a simple coordination game. 

Example 4.6. Consider the game with A = {C = collaborate , D = defect }, R(a1, a 2) = 1 if a1 = C or 

a2 = C (at least one player collaborates) and R(a1, a 2) = 0 if a1 = a2 = D (both defect), and c(ai) = 0 .4 if 

ai = C (cost of collaboration) and c(ai) = 0 .0 otherwise. We fix Пө = 0 .2 and study the effect of the degree of risk aversion on the game in Fig. 1. Without risk aversion, the game has one symmetric and two free-riding RQE. As the degree of risk aversion increases, players become increasingly collaborative and the degree of free-riding diminishes. Importantly, there is a threshold where the two free-riding RQEs disappear and вҖңmergeвҖқ into the symmetric oneвҖ”a phenomenon known as pitchfork bifurcation. We validate this theorem through our experiments in both the Overcooked gridworld and the Tag environment. In both environments, we empirically observe that Nash agents naturally learn to free-ride at equilibrium which in turn severely degrades their ability to generalize to new agents. Our strategic risk-averse agents however tend to put more effort into the task and thus generalize better to new agents. 

Remark 4.7 . In our ablation studies on the effects of risk aversion, we empirically observe a threshold-like phenomenon under which free riding disappears as risk aversion increases past a certain threshold. This seems to validate that the implications of Theorem 4.5 hold beyond the simple classes of games covered by the theorem. 65 MARL Algorithm Design 

The theoretical benefits of strategic risk aversionвҖ”increased collaboration and no free-ridingвҖ”prompt us to design scalable strategically risk-averse training algorithms for MARL. We do so in the general setting of policy optimization algorithms. For a more detailed mathematical background of risk aversion in MARL, we refer to Appendix C. 

## 5.1 Meta-algorithm for Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization 

In standard policy optimization, each agent seeks a policy ПҖОёi , parametrized by parameters Оёi, that maximizes an objective function Li(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i), which is a function of the policies of all agents. Inspired by our strategically risk-averse utility (1), it is tempting to replace this objective function with 

inf 

> П•i

Li(Оёi, П• i) + 1

П„i

KL( П•i, Оё вҲ’i) вҲ’ ПөiH(Оёi), (4) where, to ease exposition, we slightly overload the notation of KL (П•i, Оё вҲ’i) to be the (expected) KL-divergence between the induced policies across states (if the problem is one of MARL) . Unfortunately, the computation of this objective poses a significant computational challenge. The mere evaluation of this objective, as well as the computation of its gradient, requires solving a high-dimensional non-convex optimization problemвҖ”the infimum over П•iвҖ”and is therefore computationally prohibitive. To bypass this complexity, we follow Mazumdar et al. (2024) and resort to an auxiliary game in which we augment the number of players. For each agent i, we replace the infimum in (4) by an adversary that aims to inflict maximum damage to agent i, while not deviating too much from the other agentsвҖҷ policies, and is thus designed to solve the infimum in (4) . As such, the objective of agent i is now a function of their parameters 

Оёi and those of their adversary: 

Li(Оёi, П• i) + 1

П„i

KL( П•i, Оё вҲ’i) вҲ’ ПөiH(Оёi), (5) where the KL term can now be dropped as it does not affect the agentвҖҷs parameters. The objective of the adversary agent, who controls the adversarial policy ПҖП•i and whose goal is to minimize the objective of agent 

i, depends on the parameters of all agents and is therefore given by 

вҲ’L i(Оёi, П• i) вҲ’ 1

П„i

KL( П•i, Оё вҲ’i) + ПөiH(Оёi), (6) where the entropy term can be dropped. While adversarial training has been proposed as a robustness technique, such methods are often unstable to train and result in over-conservative policies (Bukharin et al., 2023; Lauffer et al., 2025). The key insight resulting from strategic risk aversion is the idea to constrain the adversary to not deviate from the opponents policy (which is also evolving during training). This extra step stabilizes training. This framing provides us with a meta-algorithm for strategically risk-averse MARL. We now instantiate this algorithm in the case of PPO, also called independent PPO (IPPO) when deployed in multi-agent settings (Yu et al., 2022), and introduce Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization (SRPO), the first strategically risk-averse algorithm for MARL. 

## 5.2 SRPO 

When using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), the objective of agent i is given by 

LIPPO  

> i

(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i) = LCLIP  

> i

(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i) вҲ’ ПөiH(Оёi)( oti), (7) where the clipped surrogate objective is 

LCLIP  

> i

(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i) = Et

h

min 



rti (Оёi) ЛҶAti(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i),

clip (rti (Оёi), 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, 1 + Оҙ) ЛҶAti(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i)

i 

,

7with rti (Оёi) = ПҖОёi (ati |oti )    

> ПҖОёi, old (ati|oti)

being the importance sampling ratio, ЛҶAti(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i) the estimated advantage at time t

(and depends on ОёвҲ’i as it is computed using samples of the policies of all agents), ПөiH(Оёi)( oti) a (negative) entropy regularizer, and oti the observation of agent i at time t.We can now follow the meta-algorithm above to derive strategically risk-averse proximal policy optimization. Specifically, the objective of agent i is 

LSRPO  

> i

(Оёi, П• i) = LCLIP  

> i

(Оёi, П• i) вҲ’ ПөiH(Оёi)( oti). (8) Since the PPO objective already includes entropy regularization, the additional entropy term in (5) is superfluous. The objective of player iвҖҷs adversary is then 

ВҜLSRPO  

> i

(П•i, (Оёi, Оё вҲ’i)) = вҲ’L CLIP  

> i

(Оёi, П• i) вҲ’ 1

П„i

KL( П•i, Оё вҲ’i). (9) Overall, SRPO consists of running gradient descent on these objectives. We present pseudocode and details in Appendix C.2, and note here that the iteration structure and complexity of SRPO is very similar to that of IPPO. 

# 6 Experiments 

We evaluate the proposed SRPO algorithm against IPPO on three cooperative multi-agent benchmarks and one LLM-based debate task. We use IPPO as our benchmark due to its emerging role as the dominant 

scalable algorithm for collaborative MARL across numerous benchmarks (de Witt et al., 2020; Forkel and Foerster, 2025; Yu et al., 2022). The experimental design closely follows the theoretical motivations developed earlier. Concretely, our experiments test the following claims: 

вҖў Partner generalization. SRPO achieves higher and more stable cross-play performance than IPPO when paired with previously unseen partners. 

вҖў Shared reward and free-riding. In cooperative tasks with private costs, SRPO converges to equilibria with higher shared reward and reduced free-riding behavior. 

вҖў Scalability. SRPO remains practical in complex multi-agent settings when implemented with policy sharing and adversary sampling. We implement SRPO and IPPO in four representative environments: (1) a modified grid-world inspired by Overcooked AI (Carroll et al., 2019), which allows explicit modeling of both shared team rewards and private costs; (2) Tag (Lowe et al., 2017), a continuous-control coordination task; (3) 4-player Hanabi (Bard et al., 2020) with 3 colors and 3 ranks, a partially observed cooperative game requiring implicit coordination and communication used to study zero-shot coordination (Forkel and Foerster, 2025), and (4) an LLM-based multi-agent debate setting (Du et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025) on the GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021) in which agents must collaborate to solve math problems. 

Training and evaluation. Across all environments, for an apples-to-apples comparison, the number of interactions with the environment for both SRPO and IPPO are kept the same. We evaluate partner generalization using cross-play performance , where a trained agent is paired with held-out partners not encountered during training. This evaluation makes the existence of free-riding-type policies extremely apparent: the policies lead to a distinct checker-board pattern, which emerges when free-riding agents are paired with one another and fail to achieve good performance. We consistently observe this phenomenon arising from IPPO-trained agents across environments. 

Ablation studies. Across environments, we also report results of ablation studies on both entropy and strategic risk aversion to further validate our theory, show how our results are robust to hyper-parameter selection, and highlight how entropy alone cannot guarantee generalization in general collaborative games despite positive empirical evidence in special cases (Forkel and Foerster, 2025). The code will be released upon publication, and the detailed setup is in Appendix D. 8Figure 2: Cross-play and ablation experiments in the overcooked environment. Each square represents the average reward across 10 episodes of length 128 for each pair of agents. Diagonal blocks represent the training performance of the agents. (i) We directly observe that IPPO ( Пө = 0 .1) learns to free-ride while SRPO (П„ = 10 , Пө = 0 .1) does not. Furthermore, mirroring Theorem 4.1, we observe that SRPO yields higher utility strategies (i.e., risk improves performance). (ii) Results of an ablation experiment, varying П„ while holding 

Пө = 0 .1. We empirically observe that free-riding completely disappears as risk aversion increases, mirroring the result in Theorem 4.5. (iii) Difference between Training Performance (TP) and Cross-play Performance (CP) (mean and standard deviation): the performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and larger standard deviation in cross-play, while the performance of SRPO is unaffected. 

## 6.1 Overcooked Gridworld 

We construct an environment based onOvercooked Ruhdorfer et al. (2025) multi-agent benchmark to serve as a simple laboratory to verify our theory. In our Overcooked Gridworld, agents receive a shared team reward when an onion is picked up ( +1 ) and placed into a pot ( +10 ), while each agent incurs private costs for movement ( вҲ’0.2) and collision ( вҲ’2). This induces a canonical social dilemma: although the team objective is collaborative, each agent has an incentive to avoid costly effort and rely on the teammate to complete the task. Results are shown in Fig. 2. 

SRPO reduces free-riding and exhibits higher performance. Empirically, IPPO always converges to a free-riding equilibrium where one teammate avoids movement but collects high reward due to the effort of their partnerвҖ”evident in the characteristic checkerboard pattern observed in the top left block of Fig. 2(i). In contrast, SRPO learns a policy in which both agents coordinate and contribute to the task. This behavior matches SRPOвҖҷs objective: because training explicitly optimizes performance against plausible adversarial partner deviations (Section 5), non-contribution becomes risky. As we summarize in Fig. 2(iii), SRPO thus attains both higher performances and improved cross-play reliability, consistent with our theoretical predictions. 

Ablation study of the degree of strategic risk aversion П„ . As shown in Fig. 2(ii), small values of 

П„ and IPPO ( П„ = 0 ) lead to free-riding and thus poor cross-play performance, reflecting reliance on fragile conventions and lack of effort on the part of agents. As П„ increases, collaboration becomes more stable: policies converge to a consistent solution, free-riding disappears, and cross-play performance improves, validating that Theorem 4.5 holds more broadly. We also observe that SRPO is robust to choices of П„ . Ablations show consistent gains over IPPO across orders of magnitude of П„ . We make similar observations in ablation experiments in the Tag environment presented in Appendix D.6. 

## 6.2 Tag 

In Tag, two chasers must coordinate to catch a runner. The chasers get a shared positive reward (+1) if a chaser collides with a runner. We first train runner policies independently via adversarial training, and then train chaser policies using either IPPO or SRPO against a fixed runner to keep the game collaborative. 9Figure 3: Cross-play performances of SRPO ( П„ = 10 , Пө = 0 .01 ) and IPPO ( Пө = 0 .01 ) agents in the Tag environment against a runner seen during training (i) and an unseen runner (ii). Each square represents the average reward of two agents across 100 runs of length 100. IPPO does well in training environments (yet still clearly learns free-riding like policies), but their performance degrades drastically against an unseen runner. SRPO has slightly lower training performance but clearly learns a more generalizable policy. (iii) Difference between Training Performance (TP) and Cross-play Performance (CP) (mean and standard deviation): the performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and larger standard deviation in cross-play, while the performance of SRPO is almost unaffected. Cross-play performance is evaluated along two axes: (i) pairing trained chasers with an unseen chaser partner (teammate shift), and (ii) evaluating chasers against a runner policy not observed during training (opponent shift). The results are shown in Fig. 3. 

SRPO learns more generalizable policies. We empirically observe that in this standard benchmark environment, IPPO-trained agents can learn high performing policies. However, we also observe that these policies often encode free-riding and can overfit to both the runner encountered during training and specific coordination conventions it develops with its training partner. While this can produce strong in-distribution performance (i.e., on the diagonal), it degrades sharply under either teammate or runner shifts, as seen in the sharp drops in performance as IPPO agents are played against each other, as we summarize in Fig. 3(iii). In contrast, SRPO has slightly worse performance in the training environment. This highlights that in some environments incorporating strategic risk aversion may sometimes require tradeoffs with performance. In the case of Tag, we can trace this back to the lack of the aggregative structure required for Theorem 4.1. Nevertheless, SRPO attains consistently higher and more stable cross-play performance across both other partners (including free-riding IPPO agents) and runners, showing their potential to generalize more widely. 

## 6.3 Hanabi 

Hanabi is a collaborative card game in which players must play cards in the correct sequence, with the twist that you can see everyoneвҖҷs cards except your own. It is a canonical benchmark for collaboration in MARL (Bard et al., 2020). Following Lauffer et al. (2025), we consider a simplified game with 3 colors and 

3 ranks. In this setting, agents may develop private communication protocols during training that fail to generalize to unseen teammates. We focus here on the 4-player variant to demonstrate the scalability of SRPO with the number of players, and present results on 2-player games in Section D. 

Scalability of SRPO. To scale SRPO to larger numbers of agents we make use of policy sharingвҖ”i.e., we share a single risk-averse policy across agents and maintain only one adversary policy, randomly assigning the adversarial role during training. The results are shown in Fig. 4. where we observe that SRPO exhibits more stable cross-play performance than IPPO. 10 IPPO Agent 1&2 SRPO Agent 1&2      

> IPPO Agent 3&4 SRPO Agent 3&4
> 2.50
> 2.75
> 3.00
> 3.25
> 3.50
> 3.75
> 4.00
> 4.25 (a) TP CP TP CP
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> -24.8% -15.8%
> IPPO
> SRPO (b)

Figure 4: Cross-play performance of SRPO and IPPO agents in the Hanabi environment. We use policy sharing to validate the scalability of SRPO. During evaluation, we let agents 1 and 2 share a policy and agents 3 and 4 share a policy, enabling pairwise cross-play evaluation. In Fig. 4a, each square represents the average reward of the two agent groups across 100 runs, each of length 100. Fig. 4b shows the differences between training performance (TP) and cross-play performance (CP) (mean and standard deviation) for both IPPO and SRPO. SRPO remains more robust when paired with an unseen partner. Here, we set the entropy coefficient to be Пө = 0 .001 for both IPPO and SRPO, and П„ = 0 .01 for SRPO. 

## 6.4 Multi-LLM-Agent Debate on GSM8K 

To conclude, we present a proof-of-concept on using SRPO in a language-based cooperative reasoning setting in which agents must collaborate to solve grade school math word problems (Cobbe et al., 2021) through structured debate. In this setup, two agents engage in a three-round iterative debate protocol. In the first round, each agent independently observes the question and produces its own reasoning and answer. In subsequent rounds, each agent observes the original question as well as both agentsвҖҷ outputs from the previous round, and then refines its response. Successfully solving a problem therefore requires more than producing a correct answer in isolation: each agent must reinforce correct reasoning while remaining robust to potentially misleading or incorrect proposals from its teammate. This naturally induces a cooperative yet adversarial interaction, where robustness to the partnerвҖҷs policy plays a critical role in achieving reliable joint performance. Both IPPO (the existing state-of-the-art) and SRPO agents are trained using multiple base language models, including Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct (Q0.5B) and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (Q3B) (Bai et al., 2025), as well as Qwen3-0.6B (Q0.6B) and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Q4B) (Yang et al., 2025), using the verl training framework (Sheng et al., 2024). Here, we set the entropy coefficient to be Пө = 0 for both IPPO and SRPO, and П„ = 10 for SRPO. We evaluate performance along two complementary robustness dimensions. First, we measure cross-play performance between agents trained with the same method but using different model scales. Performance is quantified using joint accuracy , where a problem is counted as correct only if both agents produce the correct final answer. This metric directly reflects the ability of agents to coordinate reliably under policy heterogeneity. Second, we evaluate robustness to drastic partner shifts by pairing a trained Qwen agent with an untuned Llama 3.2-1B-Instruct model (Grattafiori et al., 2024). In this setting, we measure the accuracy of the trained agent alone, isolating its ability to maintain correct reasoning despite interacting with a potentially unreliable partner. Results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. 

SRPO extends to LLM-based multi-agent systems. As shown in Table 1, SRPO consistently improves joint accuracy over IPPO across all cross-play combinations, with gains of up to 19 .27% . This demonstrates that SRPO enhances coordination robustness across heterogeneous policies, enabling agents to reliably reach 11 Table 1: Cross-play performance (joint accuracy) across model scale combinations. Percentage improvement is computed relative to IPPO. Across all model combinations, SRPO consistently outperforms IPPO in terms of cross-play performance.                         

> Method Q0.5B&Q0.6B Q0.5B&Q3B Q0.5B&Q4B Q0.6B&Q3B Q0.6B&Q4B Q3B&Q4B
> SRPO 0.622 0.686 0.873 0.616 0.848 0.732
> IPPO 0.605 0.651 0.846 0.573 0.711 0.709 Improvement (%) +2.81% +5.38% +3.19% +7.50% +19.27% +3.24%

Table 2: Performance (the accuracy of the trained agent itself) when paired with an untuned Llama 3.2-1B-Instruct model. Percentage improvement is computed relative to IPPO. Across all model sizes, SRPO agents consistently outperform IPPO, indicating that SRPO endows the trained the power to be robust to the teammate.                 

> Method Q0.5B Q0.6B Q3B Q4B
> SRPO 0.405 0.671 0.632 0.917
> IPPO 0.378 0.587 0.552 0.901 Improvement (%) +7.14% +14.31% +14.49% +1.78%

correct joint outcomes. Furthermore, as shown in Table 2, SRPO substantially improves individual accuracy when paired with an untuned partner, achieving gains of up to 14 .49% . This indicates that SRPO-trained agents are significantly more robust to severe partner mismatch, maintaining correct reasoning even when interacting with unreliable teammates. Together, these results highlight SRPOвҖҷs effectiveness in promoting robust cooperative reasoning in multi-agent language environments. In Section D.5, we provide evidence that SRPO primarily improves collaboration, rather than the individual reasoning ability of each agent. 

# 7 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce strategic risk aversion as a principled inductive bias for learning collaborative policies that generalize to unseen partners. Using the risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE) framework, we show that strategic risk aversion can both increase contributions to shared rewards and eliminate free-riding at equilibrium, demonstrating that robustness need not be purely conservative. Guided by these insights, we propose Strategically Risk-Averse Policy Optimization (SRPO), a scalable modification of standard policy optimization. Across cooperative benchmarks (Overcooked, Tag, Hanabi) and an LLM-based debate task on GSM8K, SRPO yields improved robustness to heterogeneous or unreliable teammates, including across model scales. Future work includes extending strategic risk aversion to broader agentic AI settings such as humanвҖ“AI collaboration and multi-agent foundation model systems. 

# References 

Ahmed, Z., Le Roux, N., Norouzi, M., and Schuurmans, D. (2019). Understanding the impact of entropy on policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 151вҖ“160. PMLR. Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., et al. (2025). Qwen2.5-VL technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 .Bard, N., Foerster, J. N., Chandar, S., Burch, N., Lanctot, M., Song, H. F., Parisotto, E., Dumoulin, V., Moitra, S., Hughes, E., Dunning, I., Mourad, S., Larochelle, H., Bellemare, M. G., and Bowling, M. (2020). The Hanabi challenge: A new frontier for AI research. Artificial Intelligence , 280(C). Barrett, S., Agmon, N., Hazon, N., Kraus, S., and Stone, P. (2014). Communicating with unknown teammates. 12 In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , page 1433вҖ“1434. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Bukharin, A., Li, Y., Yu, Y., Zhang, Q., Chen, Z., Zuo, S., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., and Zhao, T. (2023). Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via adversarial regularization: Theoretical foundation and stable algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Inc. Cao, Y., Yu, W., Ren, W., and Chen, G. (2013). An overview of recent progress in the study of distributed multi-agent coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 9(1):427вҖ“438. Carroll, M., Shah, R., Ho, M. K., Griffiths, T., Seshia, S., Abbeel, P., and Dragan, A. (2019). On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d'AlchГ©-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc. Cemri, M., Pan, M. Z., Yang, S., Agrawal, L. A., Chopra, B., Tiwari, R., Keutzer, K., Parameswaran, A., Klein, D., Ramchandran, K., Zaharia, M., Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I. (2025). Why do multi-agent LLM systems fail? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13657 .Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R., et al. (2021). Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 .CorchГіn, L. C. (1994). Comparative statics for aggregative games the strong concavity case. Mathematical Social Sciences , 28(3):151вҖ“165. Dafoe, A., Bachrach, Y., Hadfield, G., Horvitz, E., Larson, K., and Graepel, T. (2021). Cooperative AI: Machines must learn to find common ground. Nature , 593(7857):33вҖ“36. de Witt, C. S., Gupta, T., Makoviichuk, D., Makoviychuk, V., Torr, P. H. S., Sun, M., and Whiteson, S. (2020). Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 .DizdareviДҮ, T., Hammond, R., Gessler, T., Calinescu, A., Cook, J., Gallici, M., Lupu, A., and Foerster, J. N. (2025). Ad-hoc human-AI coordination challenge. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 267, pages 13900вҖ“13937. PMLR. Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Mordatch, I. (2024). Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR. Eriksson, H., Basu, D., Alibeigi, M., and Dimitrakakis, C. (2022). Risk-sensitive bayesian games for multi-agent reinforcement learning under policy uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10045 .Facchinei, F. and Pang, J.-S. (2003). Finite-dimensional variational inequalities and complementarity problems .Springer. FГ¶llmer, H. and Schied, A. (2002). Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and stochastics ,6:429вҖ“447. Forkel, J. and Foerster, J. (2025). Entropy is all you need for inter-seed cross-play in hanabi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22581 .Ganesh, S., Vadori, N., Xu, M., Zheng, H., Reddy, P., and Veloso, M. (2019). Reinforcement learning for market making in a multi-agent dealer market. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05892 .Goeree, J. K., Holt, C. A., and Palfrey, T. R. (2003). Risk averse behavior in generalized matching pennies games. Games and Economic Behavior , 45(1):97вҖ“113. Goeree, J. K. and Offerman, T. (2002). Efficiency in auctions with private and common values: An experimental study. American Economic Review , 92(3):625вҖ“643. Gollier, C. (2001). The economics of risk and time . MIT press. 13 Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Vaughan, A., et al. (2024). The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Hu, H., Lerer, A., Cui, B., Pineda, L., Brown, N., and Foerster, J. (2021). Off-belief learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4369вҖ“4379. PMLR. Hu, H., Lerer, A., Peysakhovich, A., and Foerster, J. (2020). вҖңother-playвҖқ for zero-shot coordination. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4399вҖ“4410. PMLR. Kruse, T., Pandey, A. K., Alami, R., and Kirsch, A. (2013). Human-aware robot navigation: A survey. Robot. Auton. Syst. , 61(12):1726вҖ“1743. Lan, G. (2023). Policy mirror descent for reinforcement learning: Linear convergence, new sampling complexity, and generalized problem classes. Mathematical programming , 198(1):1059вҖ“1106. Lanzetti, N., Bolognani, S., and DГ¶rfler, F. (2025a). First-order conditions for optimization in the Wasserstein space. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science , 7(1):274вҖ“300. Lanzetti, N., Fricker, S., Bolognani, S., DГ¶rfler, F., and Paccagnan, D. (2025b). Strategically robust game theory via optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15325 .Lanzetti, N., Terpin, A., and DГ¶rfler, F. (2024). Variational analysis in the Wasserstein space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10676 .Lauffer, N., Shah, A., Carroll, M., Seshia, S. A., Russell, S., and Dennis, M. D. (2025). Robust and diverse multi-agent learning via rational policy gradient. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Graepel, T. (2017). Multi-agent reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. In Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems ,page 464вҖ“473, Richland, SC. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Lerer, A. and Peysakhovich, A. (2019). Learning existing social conventions via observationally augmented self-play. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , AIES вҖҷ19, page 107вҖ“114, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Liang, Y., Chen, D., Gupta, A., Du, S. S., and Jaques, N. (2024). Learning to cooperate with humans using generative agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Liu, B., Pu, Z., Pan, Y., Yi, J., Liang, Y., and Zhang, D. (2023). Lazy agents: A new perspective on solving sparse reward problem in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 21937вҖ“21950. PMLR. Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. (2017). Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,NIPSвҖҷ17, page 6382вҖ“6393, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Lupu, A., Cui, B., Hu, H., and Foerster, J. (2021). Trajectory diversity for zero-shot coordination. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 7204вҖ“7213. PMLR. Mazumdar, E., Panaganti, K., and Shi, L. (2024). Tractable equilibrium computation in Markov games through risk aversion. In International Conference on Learning Representations .McKelvey, R. D. and Palfrey, T. R. (1995). Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games and economic behavior , 10(1):6вҖ“38. Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR) вҖ , Bakhtin, A., Brown, N., Dinan, E., Farina, G., Flaherty, C., Fried, D., Goff, A., Gray, J., Hu, H., et al. (2022). Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science , 378(6624):1067вҖ“1074. 14 Muglich, D., Schroeder de Witt, C., van der Pol, E., Whiteson, S., and Foerster, J. (2022). Equivariant networks for zero-shot coordination. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 6410вҖ“6423. Curran Associates, Inc. Paccagnan, D., Gentile, B., Parise, F., Kamgarpour, M., and Lygeros, J. (2018). Nash and Wardrop equilibria in aggregative games with coupling constraints. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 64(4):1373вҖ“1388. Park, C., Han, S., Guo, X., Ozdaglar, A. E., Zhang, K., and Kim, J.-K. (2025). MAPoRL: Multi-agent post-co-training for collaborative large language models with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 30215вҖ“30248. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qiu, W., Wang, X., Yu, R., Wang, R., He, X., An, B., Obraztsova, S., and Rabinovich, Z. (2021). RMIX: Learning risk-sensitive policies for cooperative reinforcement learning agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 23049вҖ“23062. Curran Associates, Inc. Rahman, A., Fosong, E., Carlucho, I., and Albrecht, S. V. (2023). Generating teammates for training robust ad hoc teamwork agents via best-response diversity. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Ruhdorfer, C., Bortoletto, M., Penzkofer, A., and Bulling, A. (2025). The overcooked generalisation challenge: Evaluating cooperation with novel partners in unknown environments using unsupervised environment design. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz, P. (2015). Trust region policy optimization. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1889вҖ“1897. PMLR. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Shen, S., Ma, C., Li, C., Liu, W., Fu, Y., Mei, S., Liu, X., and Wang, C. (2023). Riskq: risk-sensitive multi-agent reinforcement learning value factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 34791вҖ“34825. Curran Associates, Inc. Sheng, G., Zhang, C., Ye, Z., Wu, X., Zhang, W., Zhang, R., Peng, Y., Lin, H., and Wu, C. (2024). Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256 .Shi, L., Mazumdar, E., Chi, Y., and Wierman, A. (2024). Sample-efficient robust multi-agent reinforcement learning in the face of environmental uncertainty. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR. Slumbers, O., Mguni, D. H., Blumberg, S. B., Mcaleer, S. M., Yang, Y., and Wang, J. (2023). A game-theoretic framework for managing risk in multi-agent systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 32059вҖ“32087. PMLR. Stone, P., Kaminka, G., Kraus, S., and Rosenschein, J. (2010). Ad hoc autonomous agent teams: Collaboration without pre-coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference On Artificial Intelligence , volume 24, pages 1504вҖ“1509. Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zambaldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K., and Graepel, T. (2018). Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , page 2085вҖ“2087. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Terry, J. K., Black, B., Grammel, N., Jayakumar, M., Hari, A., Sullivan, R., Santos, L., Perez, R., Horsch, C., Dieffendahl, C., Williams, N. L., Lokesh, Y., and Ravi, P. (2021). Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14471 .Tran, K.-T., Dao, D., Nguyen, M.-D., Pham, Q.-V., OвҖҷSullivan, B., and Nguyen, H. D. (2025). Multi-agent collaboration mechanisms: A survey of LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06322 .15 Treutlein, J., Dennis, M., Oesterheld, C., and Foerster, J. (2021). A new formalism, method and open issues for zero-shot coordination. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10413вҖ“10423. PMLR. Tsitsiklis, J. (1984). Problems in Decentralized Decision Making and Computation . Massuchusetts Institute of Technology. Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M., Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H., Powell, R., Ewalds, T., Georgiev, P., Oh, J., Horgan, D., Kroiss, M., Danihelka, I., Huang, A., Sifre, L., Cai, T., Agapiou, J. P., Jaderberg, M., Vezhnevets, A. S., Leblond, R., Pohlen, T., Dalibard, V., Budden, D., Sulsky, Y., Molloy, J., Paine, T. L., Gulcehre, C., Wang, Z., Pfaff, T., Wu, Y., Ring, R., Yogatama, D., WГјnsch, D., McKinney, K., Smith, O., Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T., Kavukcuoglu, K., Hassabis, D., Apps, C., and Silver, D. (2019). Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature ,575(7782):350вҖ“354. Wang, X., Zhang, S., Zhang, W., Dong, W., Chen, J., Wen, Y., and Zhang, W. (2024). ZSC-eval: An evaluation toolkit and benchmark for multi-agent zero-shot coordination. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., Awadallah, A. H., White, R. W., Burger, D., and Wang, C. (2024). Autogen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. (2025). Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Yekkehkhany, A., Murray, T., and Nagi, R. (2020). Risk-averse equilibrium for games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08414 .Yu, C., Gao, J., Liu, W., Xu, B., Tang, H., Yang, J., Wang, Y., and Wu, Y. (2023). Learning zero-shot cooperation with humans, assuming humans are biased. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. (2022). The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-agent games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 24611вҖ“24624. Curran Associates, Inc. Zhang, K., SUN, T., Tao, Y., Genc, S., Mallya, S., and Basar, T. (2020). Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 10571вҖ“10583. Zhang, Y. and Mazumdar, E. (2025). Convergent Q-learning for infinite-horizon general-sum Markov games through behavioral economics. In 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 5899вҖ“5904. IEEE. Zhang, Z., Li, X., Lin, Y., Liu, H., Chandradevan, R., Wu, L., Lin, M., Wang, F., Tang, X., He, Q., and Wang, S. (2025). Unlocking the power of multi-agent LLM for reasoning: From lazy agents to deliberation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02303 .Zhao, R., Song, J., Yuan, Y., Hu, H., Gao, Y., Wu, Y., Sun, Z., and Yang, W. (2023). Maximum entropy population-based training for zero-shot human-AI coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 6145вҖ“6153. 16 A Further Discussion on Related Work 

In this section, we discuss a broader set of related work to better position our work in the landscape of collaborative multi-agent learning and risk-averse/robust MARL. 

Collaborative MARL and Partner Generalization Research into solving collaborative decision-making problems using MARL has a long history (Cao et al., 2013), originating from a desire for solving decentralized decision-making problems (Tsitsiklis, 1984). Far from fading, these issues remain at the fore of research interest with the advent of powerful AI systems and a desire to build large teams of AI agents (Tran et al., 2025) for solving collaborative tasks. Emerging from this literature, is a general consensus that classic single-agent policy optimization algorithms like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), used in a decentralized way, can yield state-of-the-art or near state-of-the-art performance without needing to be overly specialized to the multi-agent nature of the problem (de Witt et al., 2020; Forkel and Foerster, 2025; Yu et al., 2022). Despite such results, learned policies resulting from such approaches can fail to generalize to unseen agents (Forkel and Foerster, 2025) and new environments. We validate this through our experiments and further observe that these state-of-the-art algorithms are consistently prone to learning free-riding strategies. Beyond the lines of work mentioned in Section 2, other important lines of work on addressing the partner generalization problem seek to avoid brittle coordination conventions by learning symmetry-invariant or partner-agnostic policies (Hu et al., 2020; Muglich et al., 2022; Treutlein et al., 2021). These often require strong structural assumptions and may not scale to complex collaborative environments. Another set of approaches attempt to achieve robustness by training against partner policies derived from human data (Carroll et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2024; Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR) вҖ  et al., 2022), but their effectiveness is constrained by data availability and coverage. Neither of these approaches are fully agnostic to the structure of the underlying problem and are thus not general principles that can be broadly applied across different tasks. Consequently, it remains unclear how to systematically achieve partner generalization without relying on human data or ad-hoc constructions. In this paper we showed that strategic risk aversion gives us one potential approach. Furthermore, we show that it can readily be combined with policy optimization algorithms like PPO, resulting in scalable and performant algorithms for learning generalizable policies. 

Robustness and Risk Aversion in MARL A second related line of work is the emerging literature on robust and risk-averse MARL (Qiu et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024; Slumbers et al., 2023; Yekkehkhany et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). While most of the papers study robustness or risk aversion to changes in the underlying environment (Eriksson et al., 2022; Ganesh et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2020) or to tail risks in large populations of agents (Yekkehkhany et al., 2020), in this work we study strategic risk aversion. Strategic risk aversion and robustness yield solutions that are more amenable to computation than classic game-theoretic solution concepts (Mazumdar et al., 2024), ensure robustness to unseen behaviors of the other agents, and sometimes even induce a coordination effect between the agents (Lanzetti et al., 2025b)вҖ”an empirical observation that we make rigorous in Section 4. Despite the prior work in this area, the broader benefits of the concept in collaborative games are unknown. This is the problem that we study in this paper. 

# B Proofs for Section 4 

In this section, we provide the proofs of our two main theorems, Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.5, as well as the derivation of Example 4.2 used in Fig. 1. 

## B.1 Proof of Theorem 4.1 

We begin with the proof of Theorem 4.1. We first show that there exists a RQE in the space of Gaussian strategies in the aggregative games studied in this section. We then provide the proof of a more general version of Theorem 4.1. 17 B.1.1 Preliminaries 

Before proving Proposition B.3, we study RQE for quadratic games. We start with the risk-averse quantal best response. We conduct our analysis in slightly more general settings where the playersвҖҷ utilities are 

ui(ai, a вҲ’i) = 12

 ai

aвҲ’i



,

 Hi,i Hi, вҲ’i

HвҲ’i,i HвҲ’i, вҲ’i

  ai

aвҲ’i

 

+

 hi

hвҲ’i



,

 ai

aвҲ’i

 

, (10) where the matrix  Hi,i Hi, вҲ’i

HвҲ’i,i HвҲ’i, вҲ’i



is assumed to be symmetric negative semidefinite, and Hi,i is assumed to be symmetric negative definite for all i. Throughout this section, with slight abuse of notation, we denote by xвҲ’i the product measure of the mixed strategies of all players except i.

Lemma B.1 (risk-averse quantal best response) . Let xвҲ’i be Gaussian with mean mвҲ’i and covariance matrix 

ОЈвҲ’i вү» 0. Then, the risk-averse quantal best response, defined as the maximizer of U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i), is uniquely given by a Gaussian mixed strategy with the following covariance matrix and mean: 

ОЈi = вҲ’ОөiHвҲ’1

> i,i

mi =  вҲ’Hi,i + Hi, вҲ’iP вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

вҲ’1



hi + Hi, вҲ’iP вҲ’1

> вҲ’i

 1

П„i

ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ hвҲ’i

 

,

where PвҲ’i = 1 

> П„i

ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

+ HвҲ’i, вҲ’i, provided that PвҲ’i is positive definite. If instead PвҲ’i is not positive definite, then risk is infinite. Proof. To start, recall that the duality representation of the entropic risk measure (e.g., see FГ¶llmer and Schied (2002)) gives 

sup  

> pвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn(NвҲ’1) )

E aiвҲјxi

> aвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i

[вҲ’ui(ai, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ 1

П„i

KL( p, x вҲ’i) = 1

П„i

log E aiвҲјxi

> aвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i

[exp ( вҲ’П„iui(ai, a вҲ’i))] .

Thus, we can reformulate the optimization problem for best responses as follows: 

sup 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i)= вҲ’ inf  

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

вҲ’U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i)= вҲ’ inf  

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

sup  

> pвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn(NвҲ’1) )

E aiвҲјxi

> aвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i

[вҲ’ui(ai, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ 1

П„i

KL( p, x вҲ’i) + ПөiH(xi)= вҲ’ inf 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

1

П„i

log EaвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i



exp 



вҲ’П„i( 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i, H вҲ’i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + EaiвҲјxi [вҹЁai, H i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ©] + вҹЁhвҲ’i, a вҲ’iвҹ©)

 

вҲ’ EaiвҲјxi

 12 вҹЁai, H i,i aiвҹ© + вҹЁhi, a iвҹ©



+ ПөiH(xi)= sup 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

вҲ’ 1

П„i

log EaвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i



exp 



вҲ’П„i( 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i, H вҲ’i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + EaiвҲјxi [вҹЁai, H i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ©] + вҹЁhвҲ’i, a вҲ’iвҹ©)

 

+ EaiвҲјxi

 12 вҹЁai, H i,i aiвҹ© + вҹЁhi, a iвҹ©



вҲ’ ПөiH(xi)= sup 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

вҲ’ 1

П„i

log EaвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i



exp 



вҲ’П„i

 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i, H вҲ’i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁmi, H i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁhвҲ’i, a вҲ’iвҹ©

 

+ EaiвҲјxi

 12 вҹЁai, H i,i aiвҹ© + вҹЁhi, a iвҹ©



вҲ’ ПөiH(xi).

18 When xвҲ’i is Gaussian with mean mвҲ’i and variance ОЈвҲ’i, the expression simplifies to 

EaвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i



exp 



вҲ’П„i

 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i, H вҲ’i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁai, H i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁhвҲ’i, a вҲ’iвҹ©

 

= 1

p(2 ПҖ)n det(ОЈ вҲ’i)

Z

> Rn

exp 



вҲ’ 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i вҲ’ ВҜm, ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

(aвҲ’i вҲ’ ВҜm)вҹ©

+ 12 вҹЁ ВҜmвҲ’i, ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ВҜmвҲ’iвҹ© вҲ’ 12 вҹЁmвҲ’i, ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’iвҹ©



daвҲ’i

=

s

(2 ПҖ)n det   ВҜОЈвҲ’i



(2 ПҖ)n det(ОЈ вҲ’i) exp 

 12 вҹЁ ВҜmвҲ’i, ВҜОЈвҲ’i ВҜmвҲ’iвҹ© вҲ’ 12 вҹЁmвҲ’i, ОЈвҲ’imвҲ’iвҹ©



= 1

q

det  ОЈвҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’1

> вҲ’i

 exp 

 12 вҹЁ ВҜmвҲ’i, ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ВҜmвҲ’iвҹ© вҲ’ 12 вҹЁmвҲ’i, ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’iвҹ©



,

where ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

= ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

+ П„iHвҲ’i, вҲ’i = П„iPвҲ’i and ВҜmвҲ’i = ВҜОЈ(ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ П„i(HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

mi + hвҲ’i)) . Moreover, 

det  ОЈвҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’1

> вҲ’i

 = det( I + П„iОЈвҲ’iHвҲ’i, вҲ’i).

Overall, we therefore have 

log EaвҲ’iвҲјxвҲ’i



exp 



вҲ’П„i

 12 вҹЁaвҲ’i, H вҲ’i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁai, H i, вҲ’iaвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁhвҲ’i, a вҲ’iвҹ©

 

= вҲ’ 12 log det( I + П„iОЈвҲ’iHвҲ’i, вҲ’i) + 12 вҹЁ ВҜmвҲ’i, ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ВҜmвҲ’iвҹ© вҲ’ 12 вҹЁmвҲ’i, ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’iвҹ©.

We can now plug this expression into the optimization problem for best responses and get 

sup 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

U П„i,Пө i 

> i

(xi, x вҲ’i) = sup 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶ( Rn)

12П„i

log det( I + П„iОЈвҲ’iHвҲ’i, вҲ’i) вҲ’ 12П„i

вҹЁ ВҜmвҲ’i, ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ВҜmвҲ’iвҹ© + 12П„i

вҹЁmвҲ’i, ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’iвҹ©

+ EaiвҲјxi

 12 вҹЁai, H i,i aiвҹ© + вҹЁhi, a iвҹ©



вҲ’ ПөiH(xi).

This is an unconstrained optimization problem in the space of probability measures. We will use the first-order necessary conditions in the Wasserstein space in Lanzetti et al. (2025a, 2024) to construct an optimal solution and then use the sufficient conditions to establish optimality. Using Theorem 3.2 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a), we can set the Wasserstein gradient to 0 to obtain that, at optimality, the following first-order necessary condition must hold: 

1

П„i

(вҲ’П„iHi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’i) ВҜОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ВҜm вҲ’ Hi,i ai вҲ’ hi + Пөi

вҲҮПҒ(ai)

ПҒ(ai) = 0 for xi-almost all ai вҲҲ Rn, (11) where ПҒ is the density of the optimal xi (if it exists). The first term follows from a generalization of the chain rule (Proposition 2.16 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)), while the other terms follow from the well-known Wasserstein gradients of expected values (Proposition 2.20 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)) and of entropy (Example 2.27 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)). We now make the вҖңansatzвҖқ that xi is Gaussian with mean mi and covariance 

ОЈi. Since xi is Gaussian, we have 

вҲҮПҒ(ai)

ПҒ(ai) = вҲҮ



вҲ’ 12 ai вҲ’ mi, ОЈвҲ’1 

> i

(ai вҲ’ mi)



= вҲ’ОЈвҲ’1 

> i

(ai вҲ’ mi).

Thus, together with the expression for ВҜmвҲ’i, (11) reduces 

вҲ’Hi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’i(ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ П„i(HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

mi + hвҲ’i)) вҲ’ Hi,i ai вҲ’ hi вҲ’ ПөiОЈвҲ’1 

> i

(ai вҲ’ mi) = 0 (12) We study mean and covariance separately. 19 вҖў Mean: We can then integrate (12) with respect to xi to obtain 

Z

> Rn

вҲ’Hi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’i(ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ П„i(HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

mi + hвҲ’i)) вҲ’ Hi,i ai вҲ’ hi вҲ’ ПөiОЈвҲ’1 

> i

(ai вҲ’ mi)d xi(ai) = 0 .

This yields 

вҲ’Hi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’i(ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ П„i(HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

mi + hвҲ’i)) вҲ’ (Hi,i + Qi)mi вҲ’ hi = 0 ,

and so  вҲ’Hi,i + П„iHi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’iHвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

 mi вҲ’ Hi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’iОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i + П„iHi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’ihвҲ’i вҲ’ hi = 0 .

The unique solution to this linear equation is 

mi =  вҲ’Hi,i + П„iHi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’iHвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

вҲ’1  hi + Hi, вҲ’i ВҜОЈвҲ’i(ОЈ вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’i вҲ’ П„ihвҲ’i

 .

With ВҜОЈвҲ’i = 1 

> П„i

P вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

we obtain the desired expression. 

вҖў Covariance: We right multiply (12) with (ai вҲ’ mi)вҠӨ and integrate with respect to xi to get 

вҲ’

Z

> Rn

Hi,i ai(ai вҲ’ mi)вҠӨdxi(ai) вҲ’ ПөiI = 0 

and so 

вҲ’Hi,i (ОЈ i + mimвҠӨ 

> i

вҲ’ mimвҠӨ 

> i

) вҲ’ ПөiI = 0 .

Overall, we therefore have 

ОЈi = вҲ’ПөiHвҲ’1 

> i,i

.

Finally, we notice that the objective function is strongly geodesically convex in the distribution. Thus, the candidate solution is the unique minimizer and, therefore, the unique best response to xвҲ’i (see Theorem 3.3 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)). With this lemma, we obtain a way to compute Gaussian RQE in continuous games: 

Lemma B.2. Consider a surrogate вҖңgame of the meansвҖқ, where each player selects a vector mi вҲҲ Rn to maximize the surrogate concave quadratic utility 

ВҜUi(mi, m вҲ’i) = 12 вҹЁmi, (Hi,i вҲ’ Hi, вҲ’iP вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

HвҠӨ

> i, вҲ’i

)miвҹ© + 1

П„i

вҹЁmi, H i, вҲ’iP вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

ОЈвҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

mвҲ’iвҹ© + вҹЁmi, h i вҲ’ Hi, вҲ’iP вҲ’1 

> вҲ’i

hвҲ’iвҹ©. (13) 

Then, (mвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , m вӢҶN ) is a Nash equilibrium of the game with utility (13) if and only if (xвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , x вӢҶN ), where xвӢҶi

is a Gaussian distribution with mean mвӢҶi and variance вҲ’ПөiHвҲ’1 

> i,i

, is an RQE of the game with utilities (10) .Moreover, (mвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , m вӢҶN ) is the unique Nash equilibrium of this surrogate game if and only if (xвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , x вӢҶN ) is the unique RQE in which one or more mixed strategies are Gaussian. Proof. The proof follows directly from Lemma B.1. Uniqueness in Gaussian mixed strategies follows from uniqueness of the best response. At this point, we can study RQE for games in which 

R(a1, . . . , a N ) = вҲ’ 12

> N

X

> i=1

ai вҲ’ ВҜa

> 2
> H

= вҲ’ 12

* NX

> i=1

ai вҲ’ ВҜa, H 

> N

X

> i=1

ai вҲ’ ВҜa

!+ 

ci(ai) = ПҒi

2 вҲҘaiвҲҘ2,

where we assume that the matrix H, used in the weighted norm, is symmetric positive definite and ПҒi > 0.As we will show below, considering this class is sufficient. 20 Proposition B.3 (computation of RQE) . Let Пөi > 0 and П„i > 0 so that 

1

П„iПөj

(ПҒj + H) вҲ’ H вү» 0 вҲҖjМё = i. (14) 

Let (mвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , m вӢҶN ) вҲҲ Rn Г— . . . Г— Rn be a Nash equilibrium of the surrogate game where the utility of each player is 

ВҜUi(mi, m вҲ’i) = 12

*

mi,

пЈ«пЈӯвҲ’ПҒiI вҲ’ H вҲ’ X 

> jМё=i

HP вҲ’1 

> ij

H

пЈ¶пЈё mi

+

вҲ’ 1

П„i

*

mi, H 

пЈ«пЈӯX 

> jМё=i

P вҲ’1 

> ij

ОЈвҲ’1 

> j

mj

пЈ¶пЈё+

+

*

mi, H ВҜa + H X 

> jМё=i

P вҲ’1 

> ij

HВҜa

+

,

where ОЈi = Пөi(ПҒiI + H)вҲ’1 вү» 0 and Pij = 1 

> П„iПөj

(ПҒj I + H) вҲ’ H вү» 0. Then, the Gaussian mixed strategies 

(xвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , x вӢҶN ) form an RQE of the game and, at equilibrium, each player has finite costs. Moreover, if the equilibrium (mвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , m вӢҶN ) is unique, then (xвӢҶ

> 1

, . . . , x вӢҶN ) is the unique Gaussian RQE. In particular, this is the case ПҒi, the degrees of risk aversion, and the degrees of bounded rationality are player-independent (i.e., 

ПҒi = ПҒ, П„i = П„ , and Пө = Пөi). Proof. The proof follows directly from Lemma B.2, where we have Hi,i = вҲ’H вҲ’ ПҒiI, HвҲ’i, вҲ’i = IN вҲ’1 вҠ— (вҲ’H),

Hi, вҲ’i = вҲ’H . . . вҲ’H, hi = HВҜa, and hвҲ’i = (HВҜa)вҠӨ В· В· В· (HВҜa)вҠӨвҠӨ. We now show that if ПҒi = ПҒ,

П„i = П„ , and Пөi = Пө we have uniqueness. We show this in the case of two players; the general case is then a straightforward extension. For uniqueness, it suffices to check that the surrogate game is strongly monotone and therefore will have a unique Nash equilibrium (Facchinei and Pang, 2003). Since ПҒi = ПҒ, П„i = П„ , and 

Пөi = Пө, we also have ОЈ2 = ОЈ 2 = ОЈ and P12 = P21 = P . In this case, the game map reads 

F(m1, m 2) = 

вҲӮm1

ВҜU1(m1, m 2)

вҲӮm2

ВҜU2(m2, m 1)



= F

m1

m2



+ f, 

where 

F := 

вҲ’ПҒI вҲ’ H вҲ’ HP вҲ’1HвҠӨ вҲ’ 1 

> П„

HP вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’1

вҲ’ 1 

> П„

HP вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’1 вҲ’ПҒI вҲ’ H вҲ’ HP вҲ’1HвҠӨ



f =

HВҜa + HP вҲ’1HВҜaHВҜa + HP вҲ’1HВҜa



.

With 

вҲ’ 1

П„ HP вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’1 = вҲ’ 1

П„ H

 1

П„ ОЈвҲ’1 вҲ’ H

вҲ’1

ОЈвҲ’1 = вҲ’H(I вҲ’ П„ ОЈH)вҲ’1

= вҲ’H + П„ H ОЈH(I вҲ’ П„ ОЈH)вҲ’1 = вҲ’H вҲ’ H

 1

П„ ОЈвҲ’1 вҲ’ H

вҲ’1

H = вҲ’H вҲ’ HP вҲ’1H

we have 

F =

вҲ’ПҒI 00 вҲ’ПҒI 



+

вҲ’H вҲ’H

вҲ’H вҲ’H



+

вҲ’HP вҲ’1H вҲ’HP вҲ’1H

вҲ’HP вҲ’1H вҲ’HP вҲ’1H



.

Clearly, F is negative definite, as it results from the sum of a negative definite matrix and two positive semidefinite matrices. Thus, the game map is strongly monotone, and we have uniqueness. 

Discussion A few observations on this result. First, the surrogate game can be solved by setting the gradient of each playerвҖҷs utility to zero, which yields a linear system of equations which can be shown to possess a unique solution whenever ПҒi > 0. Second, if the assumption (14) is violated, then the utility of player i will generally diverge вҲ’вҲһ and, thus, the player has вҖңinfiniteвҖқ risk. To rule out this triviality, we therefore assume (14) . Third, uniqueness is in the space of Gaussian mixed strategies. Thus, there might exist another equilibrium in which all mixed strategies are non-Gaussian. 21 B.1.2 Proof of Theorem 4.1 

We prove a more general version of Theorem 4.1. 

Theorem B.4 (risk induces collaboration) . Consider the game with utilities in (4.1) . On the domain of 

П„i where (14) and where the Gaussian RQE in unique 2, let xвӢҶi (П„1, . . . , П„ N ) be the mixed strategy of player i

at the unique Gaussian RQE of the game, as a function of the degrees of risk aversion П„1, . . . , П„ N . Then, the expected shared reward (П„1, . . . , П„ N ) 7 вҶ’ J(П„1, . . . , П„ N ), where 

J(П„1, . . . , П„ N ) := EaiвҲјxвӢҶi (П„1,...,П„ N ) [R(a1, . . . , a N )] ,

is strictly increasing 3That is, players contribute more to the joint reward as they become more risk-averse. Proof of Theorem B.4. For simplicity of notation, we conduct the proof in the case of two players, with the extension to more players being straightforward. To start, we show that, without loss of generality, the problem can be simplified, via the following three steps. First, we notice 

R(a1, a 2) = 12 вҹЁa1 + a2, H (a1 + a2)вҹ© + вҹЁh, a 1 + a2вҹ© = 12 вҹЁa1 + a2 + HвҲ’1h, H (a1 + a2 + HвҲ’1h)вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁ h, H вҲ’1hвҹ©.

Since the term вҹЁh, H вҲ’1hвҹ© is constant, we can therefore without loss of generality focus on the reward 

R(a1, a 2) = 12 вҹЁa1 + a2 + HвҲ’1h, H (a1 + a2 + HвҲ’1h)вҹ©.

Additionally, if we let ВҜH = вҲ’H, which is positive definite, we have 

R(a1, a 2) = вҲ’ 12 вҹЁa1 + a2 вҲ’ ВҜHвҲ’1h, ВҜH(a1 + a2 вҲ’ ВҜHвҲ’1h)вҹ© = вҲ’ 12 вҲҘa1 + a2 вҲ’ ВҜaвҲҘ2ВҜH

where ВҜa := ВҜHвҲ’1h = вҲ’HвҲ’1h. Second, up to replacing Qi := ПҒiI with ПҒi ВҜH and rescaling ВҜa, we can assume, without loss of generality, that ВҜH = I (i.e., H = вҲ’I). Third, we note that, since the variance of each mixed strategy xвӢҶi (П„1, П„ 2) does not depend on risk parameters П„1, П„ 2, it suffices to study the monotonicity of the function 

ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) = вҲ’ 12 вҲҘmвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜaвҲҘ2,

where mвӢҶi (П„1, П„ 2) is the mean of xвӢҶi (П„1, П„ 2) at the unique Gaussian RQE. Thus, we now study the monotonicity of ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2). From basic sensitivity analysis, ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) is smooth and, thus, all its directional derivatives can be expressed via its gradient. To evaluate the gradient of ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2), we compute its partial derivatives via the product rule as follows: 

вҲӮП„i

ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) = вҲ’вҹЁ mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa, вҲӮ П„i mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + вҲӮП„i mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)вҹ©. (15) We evaluate this derivative for i = 1 , with the case i = 2 being analogous. As a preliminary, we note that 

mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



=

вҲ’Q1 вҲ’ I вҲ’ P вҲ’112 вҲ’ 1 

> П„1

P вҲ’112 ОЈвҲ’12

вҲ’ 1 

> П„2

P вҲ’121 ОЈвҲ’11 вҲ’Q2 вҲ’ I вҲ’ P вҲ’121 

| {z }

> S(П„1,П„ 2)

вҲ’ВҜa вҲ’ P вҲ’112 ВҜa

вҲ’ВҜa вҲ’ P вҲ’112 ВҜa



=

Q1 + I + P вҲ’112 1 

> П„1

P вҲ’112 ОЈвҲ’121 

> П„2

P вҲ’121 ОЈвҲ’11 Q2 + I + P вҲ’121 

| {z }

> S(П„1,П„ 2)

ВҜa + P вҲ’112 ВҜa

ВҜa + P вҲ’112 ВҜa

| {z }

> s(П„1,П„ 2)

,               

> 3Uniqueness holds whenever the game is symmetric or П„iis sufficiently small. In general, uniqueness of Gaussian RQE can be checked studying the uniqueness of Nash equilibria for the surrogate game Proposition B.3, and, amounts to checking positive (or negative) positiveness of a matrix.
> 3Here, strictly increasing means that if П„вҖІ
> iвүҘП„ifor all iwith one inequality strict, then J(П„вҖІ
> 1, . . . , П„ вҖІ
> N)> J (П„1, . . . , П„ N).

22 where S(П„1, П„ 2) is a matrix whose symmetric part is positive definite. Thus, by the product and chain rule, we conclude that 

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



= вҲ’S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1



вҲӮП„1 S(П„1, П„ 2)

mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



вҲ’ вҲӮП„1 s(П„1, П„ 2)



.

Using 

вҲӮП„1 P вҲ’112 = (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’12 (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1 = (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’2ОЈвҲ’12 = вҲӮП„1

 1

П„1

P вҲ’112 ОЈвҲ’12



,

we now plug in all expressions to obtain 

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



= вҲ’S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1

 вҲӮП„1 P вҲ’112 вҲӮП„1 

> 1
> П„i

P вҲ’112 ОЈвҲ’12

0 0

  mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



вҲ’

вҲӮП„1 P вҲ’112 ВҜa

0

 

= вҲ’S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1

  (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’12 (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1 (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’2ОЈвҲ’12

0 0

  mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



вҲ’

(ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1ОЈвҲ’12 (ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’1ВҜa

0

  

= вҲ’S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1

(ОЈ вҲ’12 вҲ’ П„1I)вҲ’2ОЈвҲ’12

0



(mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa)= вҲ’ 1

П„ 21

S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1

P вҲ’22 ОЈвҲ’12

0



(mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa).

Thus, we have 

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)= I I вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2)

вҲӮП„1 mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2)



= вҲ’ 1

П„ 21

I I S(П„1, П„ 2)вҲ’1

P вҲ’22 ОЈвҲ’12

0

| {z }

> N

(mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa),

so that (15) becomes 

вҲӮП„1

ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) = 1

П„ 21

вҹЁmвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa, N (mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) вҲ’ ВҜa)вҹ©.

To conclude the proof, it suffices to show that N is positive definite for all П„i вүҘ 0. Indeed, in this case, 

вҲӮП„i

ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) is always positive (unless mвӢҶ

> 1

(П„1, П„ 2) + mвӢҶ

> 2

(П„1, П„ 2) = ВҜa, which however cannot happen if ПҒ1, ПҒ 2 > 0)and, thus, the shared reward ВҜJ(П„1, П„ 2) is strictly increasing. Thus, in the rest of the proof, we will show that 

N is positive definite. Using the formula for the inverse of block matrices, we conclude that 

N =



I + ( Q2 + I + P вҲ’112 )вҲ’1 1

П„2

P вҲ’121 ОЈвҲ’11

| {z }

> N1



Q1 + I + P вҲ’112 + 1

П„1

P вҲ’112 ОЈвҲ’12 (Q2 + I + P вҲ’121 )вҲ’1 1

П„2

P вҲ’121 ОЈвҲ’11

вҲ’1

| {z } 

> NвҲ’12

P вҲ’212 ОЈвҲ’12

| {z } 

> NвҲ’13

.

Since Q1 = ПҒ1H and Q2 = ПҒ2H commute, we have that ОЈ1, ОЈ2, P 12 , P 21 , and thus N1, N 2, N 3 belong to the subalgebra induced by {Q1, Q 2} and, thus, commute. Therefore, each Ni results from the sum and product of symmetric and positive definite matrices (and their inverses) that commute and, as such, is symmetric and positive definite. As a consequence, the matrix N is also symmetric and positive definite. 23 The proof of Theorem 4.1 is now a direct consequence: 

Proof of Theorem 4.1. The proof follows from Theorem B.4 and Proposition B.3, using ПҒi = ПҒ, П„i = П„ , and 

Пөi = Пө for all agents. To conclude, we provide more details on Example 4.2: 

Example B.5 (Details on Example 4.2) . For the game in Example 4.2, we have H = 1 , ПҒi = 1 , and ci = 0 ,so that ОЈi = Пөi 

> 2

and Pij = 2 

> П„iПөj

вҲ’ 1 = 2вҲ’П„iПөj 

> П„iПөj

so that 

ВҜUi(mi, m вҲ’i) = вҲ’ 12



2 + П„iПөj

2 вҲ’ П„iПөj



m2 

> i

вҲ’ 1

П„i

П„iПөj

2 вҲ’ П„iПөj

2

Пөj

mimвҲ’i + mi



1 + П„iПөj

2 вҲ’ П„iПөj



ВҜa. 

With П„1 = П„2 = П„ and Пө1 = Пө2 = Пө, we obtain the expected reward of each player from the shared reward J(П„ )

minus the personal reward and it can be shown to be 

вҲ’ 122 вҲ’ П„ Пө + ( П„ Пө  

> 2

)2

(3 вҲ’ П„ Пө  

> 2

)2 + C, 

where C is a constant that results from the variance of the mixed strategies and is therefore not dependent on П„ but only on Пө.

## B.2 Proof of Theorem 4.5 

In this section, we provide the proof of Theorem 4.5. To do so, we first derive several helper-lemmas which guarantee us that (i) playersвҖҷ strategies in an RQE are on the interior of the simplex, (ii) the KL-divergence between any strategy and an RQE strategy is uniformly bounded, and (iii) that we can relate the degree of free-riding to a lower bound on the distance between equilibrium strategies. To begin, we define some useful quantities that capture measures of the spread of playersвҖҷ costs and reward functions cmax := max a c(a),

cmin := min a c(a), vmin := min a1,a 2 R(a1, a 2) вҲ’ cmax , vmax := max a1,a 2 R(a1, a 2) вҲ’ cmin , and ВҜv := vmax вҲ’ vmin .Throughout the proof, we let n := |A| be the number of actions and вҲҶn = вҲҶ( A) be the probability simplex. For a mixed strategy x вҲҲ вҲҶn, we denote by x(a) вҲҲ [0 , 1] the probability mass assigned to the action a.

Lemma B.6. Suppose that players have degree of bounded rationality Пө. At a RQE, a playerвҖҷs strategy xi

has support on all actions, with probability at least m = exp( вҲ’ВҜv/Пө ) 

> n

.Proof. In a RQE, a playerвҖҷs strategy xвҲ— 

> i

must satisfy 

xвҲ— 

> i

= arg max 

> xiвҲҲвҲҶn

вҹЁxi, Rp вҲ—вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁ c, x iвҹ© вҲ’ ПөH (xi),

where pвҲ— = arg min pвҲҲвҲҶn вҹЁxi, Rp вҲ—вҹ© + 1 

> П„

KL (p, x вҲ—вҲ’i). Letting v := Rp вҲ— вҲ’ c, the classic results show that xi is a Boltzmann distribution of the form: 

xi(a) = exp( v(a)/Пө )

PnaвҖІ=1 exp( v(aвҖІ)/Пө ) ,

where xi(a) is the probability mass assigned to action ai. By minimizing the numerator and maximizing the denominator of the right hand side we find that: 

xi(a) вүҘ exp( вҲ’ВҜv/Пө )

n ,

which completes the proof. 

Lemma B.7. Suppose x2 вҲҲ Пғ(вҲҶ n) where Пғ(вҲҶ n) := {x вҲҲ вҲҶ : x(a) вүҘ m for all a вҲҲ A} where m вҲҲ (0 , 1 

> n

).Then the KL divergence between any distribution p вҲҲ вҲҶn and x2 is bounded by 

sup 

> qвҲҲвҲҶn

KL( q, x 2) вүӨ log 

 1

m



.

24 Proof. We directly have 

KL( q, x 2) = X

> aвҲҲA

q(a) log 

 q(a)

x2(a)



вүӨ X

> a

q(a) log 

 1

m



= log 

 1

m



since x2(a) вүҘ m.

Lemma B.8. Let x1, x 2 вҲҲ вҲҶn. If |вҹЁ c, x 1 вҲ’ x2вҹ©| вүҘ Оҙ, then 

вҲҘx1 вҲ’ x2вҲҘ1 вүҘ 2Оҙcmax вҲ’ cmin 

.

Proof. Let d := x1 вҲ’x2. Since x1, x 2 вҲҲ вҲҶn, P 

> a

da = 0 . We use the fact that, for any d вҲҲ Rn with P 

> a

d(a) = 0 ,

|вҹЁ c, d вҹ©| вүӨ cmax вҲ’cmin  

> 2

вҲҘdвҲҘ1. This directly yields 

Оҙ вүӨ |вҹЁ c, d вҹ©| вүӨ cmax вҲ’ cmin 

2 вҲҘx1 вҲ’ x2вҲҘ1.

Rearranging yields the lower bound. We can now prove Theorem 4.5, restated below with all constants made explicit. 

Theorem B.9. Let Оҙ > 0. Suppose that players have a degree of bounded rationality Пө > 0 and degrees of risk aversion П„ > 0 that satisfies 

П„ > 2( Пө log n + ВҜ v)( cmax вҲ’ cmin )2

ПөОҙ 2 ,

then the game cannot admit a RQE with degree of free-riding greater than Оҙ.Proof. We prove this by contradiction. We assume that П„ > 2( Пө log n+ВҜ v)( cmax вҲ’cmin )2 

> ПөОҙ 2

and that x1 and x2

constitute a resulting RQE with a level of free riding larger than Оҙ; i.e., |вҹЁ c, x 1 вҲ’ x2вҹ©| вүҘ Оҙ . Define the worst-case utility W (x) and the robust-regularized objective ОҰ( x):

U (x, q ) := вҹЁx, Rq вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁ c, x вҹ©

W (x) := inf 

> qвҲҲвҲҶn

U (x, q )ОҰ( x) := W (x) вҲ’ ПөH (x)

Since W is concave (as the infimum of affine functions) and H is strongly convex on вҲҶn with respect to the 

в„“1 norm, ОҰ is Пө-strongly concave on вҲҶn with respect to the в„“1 norm. Let us consider player 1вҖҷs risk-adjusted utility. Without loss of generality, we develop the following for x1,the results hold for x2 by symmetry. We first show that we can lower bound the risk-adjusted objective by our worst case objective for any x1, x 2 вҲҲ вҲҶn:

U П„ (x1, x 2) = min 

> qвҲҲвҲҶn

U (x1, q ) + 1

П„ KL( q, x 2) вүҘ min 

> qвҲҲвҲҶn

U (x1, q ) = W (x1).

Now consider an RQE made up of strategies (x1, x 2), we upper bound the risk-adjusted objective by using the fact that x1 and x2 are on the interior of the simplex since they are entropy-regularized best responses (Lemma B.6), and thus the KL term is bounded by Lemma B.7. Letting C := log n + ВҜvПө be the resulting upper bound (which depends solely on R, c, Пө and the dimension n) we conclude that 

U П„ (x1, x 2) = min 

> qвҲҲвҲҶn

U (x1, q ) + 1

П„ KL( q, x 2) вүӨ W (x1) + CП„ .

Putting these together, we have 

ОҰ( x1) = W (x1) вҲ’ ПөH (x1) вүӨ U П„ (x1, x 2) вҲ’ ПөH (x1) вүӨ W (x1) + CП„ вҲ’ ПөH (x1) = ОҰ( x1) + CП„ .

25 Using the definition of an RQE, we can further develop this to find that, for all x вҲҲ вҲҶn:

ОҰ( x1) + CП„ вүҘ U П„ (x1, x 2) вҲ’ ПөH (x1) вүҘ U П„ (x, x 2) вҲ’ ПөH (x) вүҘ ОҰ( x)

Re-arranging, and using the fact that ОҰ is strongly concave with respect to the в„“1 norm on the simplex, we have 

ОҰ( x) вүӨ ОҰ( xвӢҶ) вҲ’ Пө

2 вҲҘx1 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ21

where xвӢҶ = arg min xвҲҲвҲҶn ОҰ( x) is the unique minimizer of ОҰ over the simplex. Thus, 

Пө

2 вҲҘx1 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ21 вүӨ ОҰ( xвҲ—) вҲ’ ОҰ( x1) вүӨ CП„ =вҮ’ вҲҘ x1 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ1 вүӨ

r 2CП„ .

By symmetry the same bound holds for x2, and thus via the triangle inequality we obtain 

вҲҘx1 вҲ’ x2вҲҘ1 вүӨ вҲҘ x1 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ1 + вҲҘx2 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ1 вүӨ 2

r 2CП„ .

Via Lemma B.8, however we have that 

2Оҙcmax вҲ’ cmin 

вүӨ вҲҘ x1 вҲ’ x2вҲҘ1 вүӨ вҲҘ x1 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ1 + вҲҘx2 вҲ’ xвӢҶвҲҘ1 вүӨ 2

r 2CП„ .

Re-arranging, we find that 

П„ вүӨ 2C(cmax вҲ’ cmin )2

Оҙ2 .

Plugging in our value for C = log n + ВҜvПө , this implies that 

П„ вүӨ 2( Пө log n + ВҜ v)( cmax вҲ’ cmin )2

ПөОҙ 2 .

However, we assumed that the RQE resulted from the use of a П„ > 2( Пө log n+ВҜ v)( cmax вҲ’cmin )2 

> ПөОҙ 2

which is a contradiction. 

# C Mathematical Background of SRPO 

In this section, we provide a formal framework for risk aversion and bounded rationality in MARL, and present the motivation for our algorithm SRPO. We first introduce the mathematical framework of discounted general-sum Markov games, and then discuss how to extend risk aversion and bounded rationality from normal-form games to Markov games. Next, we present the pseudocode of SRPO and a short discussion. To better motivate SRPO, we provide policy gradient theorems for each original player and adversary as well as their performance difference lemmas (PDLs), and introduce how to (mathematically) obtain the SRPO loss from the PDLs. 

## C.1 Discounted General-sum Markov Games 

We consider a discounted N -player general-sum Markov game is specified by a tuple: 

MG = {S , {A i}Ni=1 , {ri}Ni=1 , Оі, P, ПҒ 0},

where S is the state space of the underlying MDP, Ai is the action space of player i вҲҲ [N ], and we use the notation A = QNi=1 Ai to denote the product action space of both players. We assume that |S| and |A i| are all finite. Here, ri : S Г— A вҶ’ [0 , 1] is the reward function of player i, which we assume to be deterministic. We use r to denote the joint reward function r := ( ri)Ni=1 . Moreover, Оі вҲҲ [0 , 1) is the discount factor and 

P : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ( S) is the transition kernel, where вҲҶ( S) is the probability simplex of S and P (sвҖІ|s, a) is the 26 probability of the next state being sвҖІ given the current state s and the current actions a = ( ai)Ni=1 of the players. We use ПҒ0 вҲҲ вҲҶ( S) to denote the initial state distribution. We focus on Markov policies , the class of policies where the action selection probability only depends on the current state instead of the entire gameplay trajectory, i.e., ПҖ = ( ПҖi)Ni=1 where ПҖi : S вҶ’ вҲҶ( Ai), i вҲҲ [N ].Given a product Markov policy ПҖ, without considering risk aversion and bounded rationality, player i has an expected discounted cumulative reward given by EПҖ [PвҲһ 

> t=0

Оіtri(st, a t)] .To incorporate risk aversion and bounded rationality in discounted infinite-horizon Markov games, we slightly overload the notations in normal-form games and consider the following risk-adjusted objective of player i that minimizes fi(ПҖi, ПҖ вҲ’i) = max pi:SвҶ’ вҲҶ( AвҲ’i) Ji(ПҖi, ПҖ вҲ’i, p i) where Ji is defined as 

Ji(ПҖi, ПҖ вҲ’i, p i) = EПҖ,p,s 0вҲјПҒ0

 вҲһX

> t=0

Оіt



ri(st, at) + 1

П„i

Di (pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; st) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; st)

 

(16) where the joint actions at are sampled through ai,t вҲј ПҖi(В·| st) and aвҲ’i,t вҲј pi(В·| st) and the next state st+1 

is sampled from st+1 вҲј P (В·| st, at), and the notations of Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s) and ОҪi(ПҖi; s) are abbreviations of 

Di(pi(В·| s), ПҖ вҲ’i(В·| s)) and ОҪi(ПҖi(В·| s)) respectively. Here, we allow for more generality of the regularizers, and, if we want to be consistent with the main body, we can choose Di to be KL , and ОҪi to be negative entropy H.Given a set of original player policies ПҖi and adversarial policies pi, we define the value function for each state s вҲҲ S as: 

V ПҖ,p i (s) = EПҖ,p,s 0=s

 вҲһX

> t=0

Оіt



ri(st, at) + 1

П„i

Di (pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; st) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; st)

 

(17) so that Ji(ПҖ, p ) = EsвҲјПҒ0 [V ПҖ,p i (s)] , and the Q function as: 

QПҖ,p i (s, a) = ri(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a)V ПҖ,p i (sвҖІ). (18) It is easy to verify that 

V ПҖ,p i (s) = ПҖi(В·| s)T QПҖ,p i (s, В·)pi(В·| s) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s). (19) Finally, we define given policies ПҖi, p i, we define the discounted state visitation probability as 

dПҖi,p i 

> s0

(s) := (1 вҲ’ Оі)

> вҲһ

X

> t=0

Оіt Pr 

> ПҖi,p i

(st = s|s0) = (1 вҲ’ Оі)

> вҲһ

X

> t=0

ОіteTs0 (P ПҖi,p i )tes, (20) where es denotes the one-hot vector corresponding to state s. To learn the RQE of the Markov game, we have to optimize the policies ПҖi to minimize (and pi to maximize) the risk-adjusted objective (16) . Here, we provide some useful tools for optimizing these policies. 

## C.2 Details of SRPO 

We present the pseudocode for SRPO in Algorithm 1. Notice that although the agents and adversaries are maximizing two losses LSRPO  

> i

and ВҜLSRPO  

> i

respectively, we unify these two losses by considering the joint loss: 

LSRPO  

> i, joint

(Оёi, Оё вҲ’i, ОІ ) = LCLIP  

> i

(Оёi, ОІ ) + 1

П„i

KL( ОІ, Оё вҲ’i) вҲ’ ПөiH(Оёi)( oti). (21) The update of agent i can be seen as maximizing LSRPO  

> i, joint

as a function of Оёi, and the update of adversary i

can be seen as minimizing LSRPO  

> i, joint

as a function of ОІ.

Discussion The iteration structure of SRPO is very similar to that of IPPO. In the data collection phase, unlike IPPO, agent i computes the advantage estimate based on rollouts played against adversary i instead of other real agents. In the optimization phase, both agent i and their adversary update their policies to maximize the SRPO losses (8) and (9) . Here, we have introduced an additional critic with parameter ПҲi with the MSE loss function LV F i (Оёi, Оё вҲ’i), as a standard practice for variance reduction in IPPO, which is only used when computing the advantage estimates. 27 Algorithm 1 Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization (SRPO) for 2n-agents  

> 1:

Initialize: Policies {ПҖОёi }ni=1 , adversaries {ПҖП•i }ni=1 , and critics {VПҲi }ni=1 . 

> 2:

Parameters: Risk aversion {П„i}ni=1 , bounded rationality {Пөi}ni=1 , learning rates О·Оё , О· П•, О· ПҲ , clipping Оҙ. 

> 3:

for iteration k = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 4:

for each agent i вҲҲ { 1, . . . , n } do  

> 5:

// Data Collection  

> 6:

Run joint policy ПҖОёi,П• i = ( ПҖОёi , ПҖ П•i ) of agent i and adversary i in the environment for T steps.  

> 7:

Store trajectories Di = {(oti, a ti, r ti )}n,T i=1 ,t =1 . 

> 8:

Compute advantage estimates ЛҶAti using local critic VПҲi . 

> 9:

// Maximin-Optimization  

> 10:

for step in steps do  

> 11:

# Update Agent by maximizing LSRPO  

> i
> 12:

Оёi вҶҗ Оёi + О·Оё вҲҮОёi LSRPO  

> i
> 13:

# Update Adversary by maximizing ВҜLSRPO  

> i
> 14:

П•i вҶҗ П•i + О·П•вҲҮП•i

ВҜLSRPO  

> i
> 15:

# Update Local Critic  

> 16:

ПҲi вҶҗ ПҲi вҲ’ О·ПҲ вҲҮПҲi LV F i (ПҲi) 

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

Update old policy parameters: Оёi, old вҶҗ Оёi for all i. 

> 20:

end for 

## C.3 Policy Gradient Theorems 

Policy gradient theorems are the most fundamental theoretical tool for nearly all policy-based algorithms. As the foundation of our framework, we provide the expression of policy gradients for the original agents and the adversaries under the risk-adjusted objectives, respectively. Although our results are the first to present these, similar results for single-agent version can be found in (Lan, 2023). For the original agents, the policy gradient theorem has the following form: 

Lemma C.1 (Policy Gradient for ПҖi). The gradient вҲҮПҖi V ПҖ,p i (s) can be written as 

вҲҮПҖi(В·| x)V ПҖ,p i (s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x) EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, В·, aвҲ’i)] вҲ’ ПөiвҲҮПҖi ОҪi(ПҖi; x) .

If ПҖi is parameterized by Оёi, we have 

вҲҮОёi V ПҖ,p i (s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі ExвҲјdПҖi,p is ,aвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| x)

"

вҲҮОёi log ПҖi(ai|x)



QПҖ,p i (x, a) вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮОҪ i(ПҖi; x)

вҲӮПҖ i(ai|x)

 #

,

where a = ( ai, aвҲ’i).Proof. We have 

вҲҮПҖi(В·| x)V ПҖ,p i (s) = вҹЁ вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(В·| x) QПҖ,p i (s, В·), (ПҖi вҠ— pi)( В·| s)вҹ©

+  EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, В·, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ ПөiвҲҮПҖi ОҪi(ПҖi; s) I[s = x]=ОіEsвҖІвҲјP ПҖi,p i (s)[вҲҮПҖi V ПҖ,p i (sвҖІ)] +  EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, В·, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ ПөiвҲҮПҖi ОҪi(ПҖi; s) I[s = x]= . . . 

= 11 вҲ’ Оі dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x) EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, В·, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ ПөiвҲҮПҖi ОҪi(ПҖi; x) .

28 Similarly, for the parameterized case, we have 

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) V ПҖ,p i (s)=

 вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) QПҖ,p i (s, В·), (ПҖi вҠ— pi)( В·| s)



+



EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, a i, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) ОҪi(ПҖi; s)



I[s = x]=ОіEsвҖІвҲјP ПҖi,p i (s)[ вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) V ПҖ,p i (sвҖІ)] + 



EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, a i, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) ОҪi(ПҖi; s)



I[s = x]= . . . 

= 11 вҲ’ Оі dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x)



EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, a i, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) ОҪi(ПҖi; x)



,

therefore, 

вҲҮОёi V ПҖ,p i (s) = X

> x,a i

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) V ПҖ,p i (s)вҲҮОёi ПҖi(ai|x)= 11 вҲ’ Оі

X

> x,a i

dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x)



EaвҲ’iвҲјpi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, a i, a вҲ’i)] вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) ОҪi(ПҖi; x)



вҲҮОёi ПҖi(ai|x)= 11 вҲ’ Оі ExвҲјdПҖi,p is EaвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| x)



вҲҮОёi log ПҖi(ai|x)



QПҖ,p i (x, a ) вҲ’ Пөi

вҲӮвҲӮПҖ i(ai|x) ОҪi(ПҖi; x)

 

.

This concludes the proof. Similarly, we have the policy gradient for pi as follows: 

Lemma C.2 (Policy gradient for pi). The gradient вҲҮpi V ПҖ,p i (s) can be written as 

вҲҮpi(В·| x)V ПҖ,p i (s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x)



EaiвҲјПҖi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, a i, В·)] + 1

П„i

вҲҮpi Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; x)



and if pi is parameterized by ВҜОёi, we have 

вҲҮВҜОёi V ПҖ,p i (s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі ExвҲјdПҖi,p is ,aвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| x)



вҲҮВҜОёi log pi(aвҲ’i|x)



QПҖ,p i (x, a) + 1

П„i

вҲӮD i(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; x)

вҲӮp i(aвҲ’i|x)

 

,

where a = ( ai, aвҲ’i).Proof. We have 

вҲҮpi(В·| x)V ПҖ,p i (s) = вҲҮpi(В·| x)(вҹЁQПҖ,p i (s, В·), (ПҖi вҠ— pi)( В·| s)вҹ©) + 1

П„i

вҲҮpi Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s)I[s = x]=вҹЁ вҲӮвҲӮp i(В·| x) QПҖ,p i (s, В·), (ПҖi вҠ— pi)( В·| s)вҹ©

+



EaiвҲјПҖi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, a i, В·)] + 1

П„i

вҲҮpi Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s)



I[s = x]=ОіEsвҖІвҲјP ПҖi,p i (s)[вҲҮpi(В·| x)V ПҖ,p i (sвҖІ)] + 



EaiвҲјПҖi(В·| s)[QПҖ,p i (s, a i, В·)] + 1

П„i

вҲҮpi Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s)



I[s = x]= . . . 

= 11 вҲ’ Оі dПҖi,p i 

> s

(x)



EaiвҲјПҖi(В·| x)[QПҖ,p i (x, a i, В·)] + 1

П„i

вҲҮpi Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; x)



,

29 and similarly for the parameterized case, 

вҲҮВҜОёi V ПҖ,p i (s)= 11 вҲ’ Оі ExвҲјdПҖi,p is EaвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| x)



вҲҮВҜОёi log pi(aвҲ’i|x)



QПҖ,p i (x, a ) + 1

П„i

вҲӮвҲӮp i(aвҲ’i|x) Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; x)

 

.

This concludes the proof. 

## C.4 Performance Difference Lemmas 

Another crucial tool for quantifying the difference in value functions (hence expected returns) between different policies through the advantage function is the performance difference lemma (PDL). For our 4-player risk-adjusted game, we state the PDLs for original agents and adversaries below: 

Lemma C.3 (Performance Difference Lemma for ПҖi). For two policies ПҖi and ПҖвҖІ 

> i

of player i, we have 

V ПҖi,z i (s) вҲ’ V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі EsвҖІвҲјdПҖi,p is ,aвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| sвҖІ)

h

AПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ, a) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; sвҖІ)

i

(22) 

where the advantage function Ai is defined as: 

AПҖi,z i (s, a) = QПҖi,z i (s, a) вҲ’ V ПҖi,z i (s) + 1

П„i

Di(z; s).

Here, z is the shorthand notation of z = ( ПҖвҲ’i, p i).Proof. We can write the difference in value function as 

V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(s) вҲ’ V ПҖi,z i (s)=EПҖвҖІ

> i,z,s 0=s

" вҲһX

> t=0

Оіt



ri(st, at) + 1

П„i

Di (z; st) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖвҖІ

> i

; st)

#

вҲ’ V ПҖi,z i (s)=V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(s) вҲ’ E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



ri(s, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(z; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s) + ОіEsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a0)V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ)



+ E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



ri(s, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(z; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s) + ОіEsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a0)V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ)



вҲ’ V ПҖi,z i (s)=E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(s) вҲ’ QПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(s, a0) вҲ’ 1

П„i

Di(z; s) + ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s)



+ ОіE(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)EsвҖІвҲјP (s, a0)

h

V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ) вҲ’ V ПҖi,z i (sвҖІ)

i

= В· В· В· 

= 11 вҲ’ Оі EsвҖІвҲјdПҖi,p is EaвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| sвҖІ)



V ПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ) вҲ’ QПҖвҖІ 

> i,z i

(sвҖІ, a) вҲ’ 1

П„i

Di(z; sвҖІ) + ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; sвҖІ)



This concludes the proof. 

Lemma C.4 (Performance Difference Lemma for pi). For two policies pi and pвҖІ 

> i

of adversary i, we have: 

V pi,ПҖ i (s) вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(s) = 11 вҲ’ Оі EsвҖІвҲјdПҖi,p is ,aвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| sвҖІ)



ApвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ, a) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; sвҖІ)



where 

Api,ПҖ i (s, a) = Qpi,ПҖ i (s, a) вҲ’ V pi,ПҖ i (s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s).

Proof. We can write the value function difference as 

V pi,ПҖ i (s) вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(s)

30 =V pi,ПҖ i (s) вҲ’ E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



ri(s, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s) + ОіEsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a0)V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ)



+ E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



ri(s, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s) + ОіEsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a0)V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ)



вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(s)=ОіE(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)EsвҖІвҲјP (В·| s, a0)[V pi,ПҖ i (sвҖІ) вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ)] + E(ai, 0,aвҲ’i, 0)вҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| s)



QpвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(s, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s) вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(s)



= . . . 

= 11 вҲ’ Оі EsвҖІвҲјdПҖi,p is EaвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—pi)( В·| sвҖІ)



QpвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ, a0) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; sвҖІ) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; sвҖІ) вҲ’ V pвҖІ 

> i,ПҖ i

(sвҖІ)



.

This concludes the proof. 

## C.5 Motivating the SRPO Objective 

Having stated the policy gradient theorems and PDLs, we now motivate our SRPO objective following the same rationale as that in TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015). Let z = ( ПҖ0, p 0) be the joint policy at the current timestep, by Lemma C.3, consider policy update for ПҖi, we can write the value function for any policy ПҖi as 

JПҖi,ПҖ 0 

> вҲ’i,p 0
> i
> i

= JПҖ0,p 0 

> i

+ 11 вҲ’ Оі EsвҲјdПҖi,p 0  

> i,aвҲј(ПҖiвҠ—p0
> i)( В·| s)



AПҖ0  

> i,ПҖ 0
> вҲ’i,p 0
> i
> i

(s, a) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s)



,

where dПҖi,p 0 

> i

is the state distribution for the initial state distribution ПҒ0. When ПҖi is constrained to be close to 

ПҖ0 

> i

, we use the following surrogate objective first proposed in TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) to approximate the expectation term by replacing the sample distribution from dПҖi,p 0 

> i

to dПҖ0  

> i,p 0
> i

:

EsвҲјdПҖ0   

> i ,p 0
> i,aвҲј(ПҖ0
> iвҠ—p0
> i)( В·| s)

 ПҖi(ai|s)

ПҖ0 

> i

(ai|s) AПҖ0,p 0 

> i
> i

(s, a) вҲ’ ПөiОҪi(ПҖi; s)



, (23) where the approximation dПҖ0  

> i,p 0
> i

вүҲ dПҖi,p 0 

> i

holds when ПҖ0 stays close to ПҖ, and importance sampling through the ratio ПҖi(ai|s)  

> ПҖ0
> i(ai|s)

on ai. Similarly by Lemma C.4, we have the following surrogate objective for pi as follows: 

EsвҲјdПҖ0   

> i ,p 0
> i,aвҲј(ПҖ0
> iвҠ—p0
> i)( В·| s)

"

pi(aвҲ’i|s)

p0 

> i

(aвҲ’i|s) Ap0  

> i,ПҖ 0
> i

(s, a) + 1

П„i

Di(pi, ПҖ вҲ’i; s)

#

. (24) The original TRPO objective suggests optimizing (23) and (24) subject to the constraints 

EdПҖ0 

> i ,p 0
> i

[KL( ПҖi(В·| s)вҲҘПҖ0 

> i

(В·| s))] вүӨ Оҙ, 

and 

EdПҖ0 

> i ,p 0
> i

[KL( pi(В·| s)вҲҘp0 

> i

(В·| s))] вүӨ Оҙ, 

respectively. A later adaptation PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) replaces these hard constraints with the clipped surrogate objective. Following this adaptation and replacing the policy to condition on observations instead of the global states, we obtain our SRPO losses (8) and (9) respectively. 

# D Experimental Details 

## D.1 Overall Setup 

Across all experiments, we compare SRPO against IPPO under a unified training and evaluation protocol. Each method is trained from scratch using multiple random seeds, and performance is reported as episodic return averaged over rollouts. 31 Figure 5: The Overcooked Gridworld envi-ronment. Figure 6: The Tag environment. 

Training. Agents are trained for a fixed interaction budget per environment, with periodic evaluation during training. Unless otherwise specified, SRPO and IPPO agents share the same architecture, optimizer settings, amount of interaction with the environment, and entropy regularization, differing only in the inclusion of the strategic risk-averse objective. Given the same total amount of interactions, SRPO and IPPO take roughly the same time to train in all environments we have. 

Cross-play evaluation. To assess unseen partner generalization, we adopt a cross-play protocol. For each environment, we collect a population of independently trained agents and evaluate all pairwise combinations without further learning. Cross-play performance is reported as a matrix, where each entry corresponds to the average episodic return of a fixed agent pair evaluated over multiple episodes. This protocol measures zero-shot coordination with previously unseen partners. 

## D.2 Overcooked Gridworld 

Environments. We implemented a revised version of Overcooked AI, shown in Fig. 5. The task is defined on a 5 Г— 5 grid with two agents acting simultaneously. Agents start from one of two symmetric initial configurations in the top left and must cooperatively pick up onions from two fixed sources and deliver them to a central pot. Each agent selects from five discrete actions (up, down, left, right, stay); non-stay actions incur a private movement cost of 0.2. Agent updates are applied sequentially in random order each step, with collisions blocked and penalized by 2.0. An agent can carry at most one onion; stepping onto an available onion grants a shared reward of +1 and removes the onion, while delivering an onion by attempting to move into the (solid) pot yields a shared reward of +10. Each onion independently respawns with probability 0.2 per step. Observations are fully shared and consist of both agentsвҖҷ positions, carry status, and onion availability. In this setup, rewards combine private movement penalties with shared team rewards, inducing cooperative behavior under individual costs. 

Training and evaluation. Each agent is trained for approximately 2 Г— 10 6 environment interactions. Training statistics are recorded every 10240 interactions, where each evaluation point reports the average return over 5 rollouts of length 128. We perform 30 independent runs for each method. IPPO agents use an entropy coefficient of Пө = 0 .1, while SRPO agents use П„ = 10 with the same entropy coefficient. For the main experiments, we construct a 60 Г— 60 cross-play matrix consisting of 30 IPPO agents and 30 SRPO agents. Each entry is averaged over 100 evaluation episodes of length 100. We report cross-play results for both the training environment and the held-out test environment. The results are shown in Fig. 2. 32 D.3 Tag 

Environment. We evaluate on the PettingZoo Multi-Agent Particle Environment (MPE) simple_tag_v3 (Terry et al., 2021), configured with 1 runner (prey), 2 chasers, and 2 static obstacles, using discrete actions and a horizon of 100 cycles per episode. The environment is shown in Fig. 6. Rewards are taken directly from the environment and scaled by 0.1, and an episode terminates when any agent is terminated or truncated. 

Training and evaluation. Each agent is trained for approximately 3 Г— 10 7 environment interactions. Training performance is recorded every 40960 interactions, where each evaluation point reports the average episodic return over 64 rollouts of length 100. We perform 30 independent runs for each method. IPPO agents use an entropy coefficient of Пө = 0 .01 , while SRPO agents use the risk aversion parameter П„ = 10 with the same entropy coefficient. To evaluate partner generalization, we construct a 60 Г— 60 cross-play matrix consisting of 30 IPPO agents and 30 SRPO agents. Each matrix entry corresponds to the average return obtained by a fixed agent pair, evaluated over 100 episodes of length 100 without further learning. In addition to cross-play on the training environment, we evaluate all agent pairs in a held-out test environment with a different runner configuration and report these results separately. The results are shown in Fig. 3. 

## D.4 Hanabi 

Environments. Hanabi is a cooperative card game where players act as distracted pyrotechnicians who must work together to launch a spectacular fireworks display by playing cards in the correct sequence, with the twist that you can see everyoneвҖҷs cards except your own and is a canonical benchmark for collaboration. At each turn, the active player chooses from moves such as playing a card to the shared firework piles, discarding a card to regain an information token, or hinting another player about the color or rank of cards in their hand; hints consume a finite pool of information tokens, and illegal plays consume life tokens. Following Lauffer et al. (2025), we consider a version with 3 colors and 3 ranks. We conduct our experiments in both the 2 player and the 4 player settings. 

Training and evaluation. Each run uses a single GPU with 1 training thread and 1000 rollout threads, collecting trajectories of episode length 100 . We train for 3 Г— 10 7 environment steps with PPO updates using 15 epochs and 1 minibatch per update. We set the learning rates to 7 Г— 10 вҲ’4 (actor) and 1 Г— 10 вҲ’3

(critic), and set the initialization gain to 0.01 . We set the entropy regularization to 0.001 and the risk aversion parameter П„ = 0 .01 . In the 2-player setting, policies use a 2-layer MLP with hidden size 128. In the 4-player setting, policies use a 2-layer MLP with hidden size 256, and each agent is randomly set to be adversary agent during each rollout for SRPO. For each setting, we construct a 20 Г— 20 cross-play matrix consisting of 

10 IPPO agents and 10 SRPO agents, trained independently with different seeds. Each entry is averaged over 

50 evaluation episodes of length 100 . The results are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. 

## D.5 Multi-agent debate on GSM8k 

Environment. In this setup, two agents engage in a three-round iterative debate protocol. In the first round, each agent independently observes the question and produces its own reasoning and answer. In subsequent rounds, each agent observes the original question as well as both agentsвҖҷ outputs from the previous round, and then refines its response. Successfully solving a problem therefore requires more than producing a correct answer in isolation: each agent must reinforce correct reasoning while remaining robust to potentially misleading or incorrect proposals from its teammate. This naturally induces a cooperative yet adversarial interaction, where robustness to the partnerвҖҷs policy plays a critical role in achieving reliable joint performance. Both IPPO (the existing state-of-the-art) and SRPO agents are trained using multiple base language models, including Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct (Q0.5B) and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (Q3B) (Bai et al., 2025), as well as Qwen3-0.6B (Q0.6B) and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Q4B) (Yang et al., 2025), using the verl training framework (Sheng et al., 2024). Here, we set the entropy coefficient to be Пө = 0 for both IPPO and SRPO, and П„ = 10 for SRPO. Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct is trained with 200 epochs, and Qwen3-0.6B is trained with 300 steps. Every 10 epochs, we evaluate the performances on a held-out validation set using the same debate setup. The results are shown in Figs. 9 to 12. Specifically, the initial accuracy before debate reflects 33 IPPO 

> Agent 1
> SRPO
> Agent 1
> IPPO
> Agent 2
> SRPO
> Agent 2
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8

(a) Hanabi 2-player. IPPO Agent 1&2 SRPO Agent 1&2  

> IPPO Agent 3&4 SRPO Agent 3&4
> 2.50
> 2.75
> 3.00
> 3.25
> 3.50
> 3.75
> 4.00
> 4.25

(b) Hanabi 4-player. 

Figure 7: Cross-play performances of SRPO ( Пө = 0 .001 , П„ = 0 .01 ) and IPPO ( Пө = 0 .001 ) in both 2-player and 

4-player hanabi games. Each square represents the average reward of two agents across 50 runs of length 100. TP CP TP CP    

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8-64.3% -47.7% IPPO
> SRPO

(a) Hanabi 2-player. TP CP TP CP   

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> -24.8% -15.8%
> IPPO
> SRPO

(b) Hanabi 4-player. 

Figure 8: Performance change (mean and standard deviation) between Training Performance (TP) and Cross-play Performance (CP): the performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and larger standard deviation in cross-play, while the performance of SRPO drops less severely. the agentвҖҷs reasoning abilities, while the final accuracy after debate reflects the agentвҖҷs coordination abilities. The results show that, compared to IPPO, SRPO only changes the agentвҖҷs coordination abilities, instead of the reasoning abilities. The final debate accuracy achieved by SRPO during training is slightly lower than that of IPPO, as SRPO is trained in the presence of an adversarial partner, whereas IPPO is not. 

## D.6 Ablation study 

We conduct ablation studies on both the risk aversion parameter П„ and the entropy coefficient Пө in the Overcooked and Tag environments. The results are shown in Figs. 13 and 14. While prior work (Forkel and Foerster, 2025) demonstrates that tuning the entropy coefficient Пө can improve cross-play performance of IPPO in the Hanabi environment, we find that this strategy does not generalize to Overcooked or Tag. In these environments, entropy tuning alone fails to yield robust partner generalization, suggesting that entropy regularization is not a principled mechanism for addressing coordination under partner shifts. 34 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 

> training epochs
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> accuracy

Initial accuracy before debate 

> IPPO
> SRPO

(a) Initial accuracy before debate. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 

> training steps
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> accuracy

Final accuracy after debate  

> IPPO
> SRPO

(b) Final accuracy after debate. 

Figure 9: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct. We point out that SRPO is trained against an adversaryвҖ”meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> training steps
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> accuracy

Initial accuracy before debate 

> IPPO
> SRPO

(a) Initial accuracy before debate. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> training steps
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> accuracy

Final accuracy after debate  

> IPPO
> SRPO

(b) Final accuracy after debate. 

Figure 10: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen3-0.6B. We point out that SRPO is trained against an adversaryвҖ”meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward. 35 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> training steps
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> accuracy

Initial accuracy before debate 

> IPPO
> SRPO

(a) Initial accuracy before debate. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> training steps
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> accuracy

Final accuracy after debate  

> IPPO
> SRPO

(b) Final accuracy after debate. 

Figure 11: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct. We point out that SRPO is trained against an adversaryвҖ”meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 

> training steps
> 0.725
> 0.750
> 0.775
> 0.800
> 0.825
> 0.850
> 0.875
> 0.900
> 0.925
> accuracy

Initial accuracy after debate 

> IPPO
> SRPO

(a) Initial accuracy before debate. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 

> training steps
> 0.750
> 0.775
> 0.800
> 0.825
> 0.850
> 0.875
> 0.900
> 0.925
> accuracy

Final accuracy after debate  

> IPPO
> SRPO

(b) Final accuracy after debate. 

Figure 12: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507. We point out that SRPO is trained against an adversaryвҖ”meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward. 36 5 1 0.5 0.1 0.05 0.01 5 1 0.5 0.1 0.05 0.01 

> 5
> 1
> 0.5
> 0.1
> 0.05
> 0.01
> 5
> 1
> 0.5
> 0.1
> 0.05
> 0.01
> IPPO
> Agent 1
> SRPO
> Agent 1
> IPPO
> Agent 2
> SRPO
> Agent 2
> -100
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300

(a) Overcooked. 0.1 0.05 0.01 0.001 0.0001 0.1 0.05 0.01 0.001 0.0001  

> 0.1
> 0.05
> 0.01
> 0.001
> 0.0001
> 0.1
> 0.05
> 0.01
> 0.001
> 0.0001
> IPPO
> Agent 1
> SRPO
> Agent 1
> IPPO
> Agent 2
> SRPO
> Agent 2
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14

(b) Tag. 

Figure 13: Ablation study on the entropy parameter Пө.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0 1000.0 

0

0.01 

0.1 

1.0 

10.0 

100.0 

1000.0 -50 

0

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

(a) Overcooked. 0 0.01 0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0 1000.0 

0

0.01 

0.1 

1.0 

10.0 

100.0 

1000.0 2.5 

5.0 

7.5 

10.0 

12.5 

15.0 

17.5 (b) Tag. 

Figure 14: Ablation study on the degree of risk aversion parameter П„ ; П„ = 0 refers to the risk-neutral case, i.e., IPPO. 37