Title: IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.17302v1

Published Time: Thu, 19 Mar 2026 00:40:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

Hongze Liu * 1 Chang Guo * 1 Yingzeng Li 1 Mengru Wang 1 Jiong Lou 1 Shijing Yuan 1 Hefeng Zhou 1

Chentao Wu 1 Jie Li 1

## Abstract 

The transition to open, distributed Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) promises scalable intelligence but introduces a non-trivial tension: maximizing global efficiency requires cooperative, resource-aware scheduling, yet autonomous agents may be self-interested and cannot be managed by a centralized controller. Prior approaches fall short in two key areas: they typically focus on single-query routing, neglecting long-term re-source reuse (e.g., KV-caching) and the com-plexities of system-level many-to-many match-ing; furthermore, they rely on generic incentive mechanisms that ignore the distinct characteris-tics of LLM inference. To bridge this gap, we propose IEMAS (Incentive-Efficiency Mecha-nism for Multi-Agent Systems), a framework that aligns economic incentives with system perfor-mance. IEMAS integrates a probabilistic predic-tive model to estimate Quality of Service (QoS) under uncertainty, which feeds into a VCG-based bipartite matching mechanism. This design guar-antees truthful capability reporting and social op-timality while explicitly leveraging KV cache-affinity to minimize computational redundancy. We implement IEMAS on top of vLLM and eval-uate it via extensive simulations. Results demon-strate that our incentive-efficiency co-design re-ducing average service cost by 35% and end-to-end latency by up to 2.9 × compared to baselines. 

## 1. Introduction 

Large Language Models have enabled autonomous agents with strong reasoning and planning abilities, motivating recent work on multi-agent LLM systems where comple-mentary agents collaborate to solve complex tasks (Guo 

> 1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Jie Li <lijiecs@sjtu.edu.cn >.

Preprint. March 19, 2026. 

et al., 2024). In practical deployments, such agents are of-ten hosted by heterogeneous entities and distributed across networked infrastructures (Guo et al., 2025). Emerging paradigms, such as BetaWeb (Guo et al., 2025), Agen-tic Web(Yang et al., 2025c), DAWN (Aminiranjbar et al., 2025), and the Internet of Agents (IoA) (Chen et al.; Wang et al., 2025), envision open, decentralized ecosystems where agents dynamically coordinate over the network to serve diverse client requests via flexible workflows. However, coordinating LLM agents in open, distributed ecosystems creates three interdependent challenges (Wang et al., 2025). P1. Scheduling and routing: Matching con-current client requests to heterogeneous, capacity-limited agents to maximize efficiency while preserving KV-prefix locality and meeting service constraints. P2. Incentives: 

Independent providers with private costs may misreport ca-pabilities or selectively serve requests unless economically motivated. P3. Communication scalability: Broadcasting agent details or context histories between all participants in-curs prohibitive latency and cost, rendering full transparency infeasible. Most prior work on request routing ( P1 ) relies on central-ized controllers or trusted environments, assumptions that break down at web scale (Kwon et al., 2023). While some studies address planning for specific multi-agent workflows (Yang et al., 2025b), they typically assume a one-to-many 

dispatch structure. In contrast, open networks exhibit a 

many-to-many structure where multiple heterogeneous re-quests must be jointly matched to distributed agents. Con-sequently, routing strategies optimal for single-query dis-patch become suboptimal in multi-agent scenarios. Cru-cially, while techniques like key–value (KV) caching yield order-of-magnitude speedups for related contexts, na ¨ıve load balancing destroys cache locality, significantly increas-ing latency and computational cost (Kwon et al., 2023; Mi-crosoft, 2023). Beyond scheduling inefficiencies, the absence of verifiable mechanisms ( P2 ) introduces strategic risks: agents may misreport capabilities or behave opportunistically. Without incentive alignment, even carefully engineered schedulers fail. While mechanism design in distributed systems has 1

> arXiv:2603.17302v1 [cs.NI] 18 Mar 2026 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems

shown promise in steering strategic actors, existing propos-als using game theory (Wang et al., 2024), auctions (You et al., 2024), contract theory (Ye et al., 2024), and persuasion (Zhong et al., 2025) generally treat agents as homogeneous resources. They fail to incorporate constraints intrinsic to LLM services, such as unpredictable generation lengths (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a), skill specialization (Yang et al., 2025b), and the critical value of KV-cache reuse (Pan et al.). Furthermore, time-to-first-token (TTFT) effects directly shape perceived latency (Chen et al., 2025a). Ignoring these factors compromises the incentive structures required to elicit truthful, high-quality participation. To design an organic LLM-MAS, mechanisms must ex-plicitly incorporate these specific factors. Such integration enables allocation rules that preserve cache locality and balance short-term throughput with long-term cooperation. While auction theory provides a foundation for incentive design under asymmetric information (Qiu et al., 2022), adapting it to LLM agent inference is non-trivial due to KV-cache dependencies and stochastic performance (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a). Moreover, in open environ-ments, agent information ( P3 ) is often incomplete, limiting the applicability of centralized optimization and motivating the need for distributed, incentive-aware mechanisms. We address these gaps by proposing IEMAS (Incentive-

Efficiency Mechanism for Multi-Agent Systems), a dis-tributed routing framework that matches client requests to suitable agents while jointly aligning economic incentives and exploiting computational resources such as KV caching. IEMAS introduces a lightweight proxy layer, where each serving node deploys a gateway for query management and cache coordination, reducing communication overhead and enabling enforceable pricing without revealing propri-etary internals. By leveraging KV-prefix caching, multi-turn queries reuse prior computation, while a cache-aware predictive model captures quality-of-service (QoS) signals, including performance, latency, partial cache states, and costs. Based on these signals, clients and agents participate in proxy-level auctions, and a Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) mechanism determines the final request-to-agent routing by jointly considering bidding outcomes, capability alignment, and dynamic workload conditions. We implement IEMAS on vLLM , demonstrating stable agent utilities and improved long-term social welfare. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to inves-tigate an incentive–efficiency co-design routing framework in agentic web ecosystems. The main contributions are summarized as follows: • We formalize the client–agent interaction model for dis-tributed LLM agent services with agent specialization. • We develop a cache-aware predictive scheme that esti-mates capability, expected latency, and cost metrics. • We design an incentive-compatible auction mechanism that promotes truthful reporting and social welfare. • We implement the proposed framework on vLLM and perform extensive experiments. The related code is available at: https://github. com/PACHAKUTlQ/IMMAS .

## 2. Related Work 

Our work bridges distributed multi-agent systems, efficient LLM serving, and algorithmic game theory. We review these domains and position IEMAS within the emerging landscape of the open Agentic Web. 

LLM-MAS and the Agentic Web: The paradigm of LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems (LLM-MAS) is shifting from closed, monolithic frameworks to open, decentralized net-works. Early systems like AutoGEN (Wu et al., 2023), MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024), and CAMEL (Li et al., 2023) demonstrated collaborative problem-solving but assumed centralized control and cooperative agents. Recent research envisions an Agentic Web or Internet of Agents (IoA) ,where heterogeneous agents dynamically discover and co-ordinate across the internet. Protocols such as IoA (Chen et al., 2025b) and OpenAgents (Xie et al., 2023) establish the connectivity layer for this vision, while infrastructures like BetaWeb (Guo et al., 2025) and DAWN (Aminiranjbar et al., 2025) focus on trust and decentralization. However, while these frameworks solve connectivity, they largely over-look the critical economic and system-level inefficiencies of distributing heavy inference workloads. Unlike IEMAS, they lack mechanisms to optimize the high data-movement costs of context transfer or prevent free-riding in trustless environments. 

LLM Routing and Cache-Aware Scheduling: Efficient routing is paramount for memory-bound Transformer in-ference. Optimizations like vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) and Orca (Yu et al., 2022) maximize throughput via non-contiguous memory management, while SGLang (Zheng et al., 2023) and Prompt Cache (Gim et al., 2024) utilize RadixAttention to achieve order-of-magnitude latency re-ductions via KV-prefix reuse. However, existing routing strategies (e.g., S-LoRA (Sheng et al., 2023), Splitwise (Patel et al., 2024)) are designed for centralized clusters with full state visibility. In open environments, na ¨ıve load balancing scatters semantically related queries, destroying cache locality. IEMAS addresses this gap by introduc-ing incentive-compatible cache-aware routing , ensuring re-quests are routed based on the economic valuation of cached states rather than simple availability. 

Mechanism Design for LLM Ecosystems: As agents be-come autonomous economic actors, mechanism design is required to ensure truthful reporting. While auction the-2IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems Query A         

> Code Gen
> Query B
> Data Analysis
> Query C
> Creative Writing
> Distributed Service Router
> Request
> Analysis
> &
> Routing
> Logic
> Agent
> Directory
> &
> Status
> Monitor
> Service Agent s
> Agent 1
> Specializa tion: Math/Logic
> Capacity: Low
> Concurrent
> Queries
> (Transmi tto
> next agent)
> Workflow Orchestration
> (Time Slot T )
> Availability Signals &
> Capabilities
> Agent 2
> Speciaiization: Coding
> Capacity:High
> Agent 3
> Specialization:Generalist
> Capacity: Medium
> Routing Logic/
> Agent Directory
> Time Slot t
> Agentic Web
> Logical Control Plane
> (Decision & State)
> Network Execute Plane
> (Topology & Pathing)

Figure 1. The Illustration of Agentic Web Routing. 

ory is well-established for cloud resource allocation, stan-dard models do not account for the stochastic, ”stateful” nature (context cache) of LLM inference. Recent works on AI marketplaces (Bansal et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025d) and truthful capability revelation (Liu et al., 2025) address strategic risks but often decouple the mechanism from sys-tem performance, treating compute as a generic commodity. IEMAS bridges this gap by embedding cache-affinity scores directly into a VCG-based auction (Vickrey, 1961; Clarke, 1971). This ensures the market selects agents that are not only capable but also architecturally positioned (via active KV-caches) to execute tasks efficiently. 

## 3. System Formulation 

We consider a distributed LLM serving system consisting of a set of clients and a set of autonomous LLM agents. Let 

C = {1, . . . , N } denote the set of clients (prior agents from workflows) and S = {1, . . . , M } denote the set of serving agents. At a time slot, every client j ∈ C concurrently sub-mits a task characterized by a semantic context Tj . Each agent i ∈ S is described by a model profile (Si, K i), where 

Si denotes the model scale (e.g., parameter size or com-pute footprint) and Ki captures its domain specialization. Agent i has a finite service capacity Bi, representing the maximum number of concurrent tasks it can process, and maintains a local key–value (KV) cache that stores prefixes from previously processed contexts. To capture the benefit of context reuse, we model the seman-tic overlap between task j and the cached state of agent i

by a score oij ∈ [0 , 1] . A higher oij indicates greater KV reuse, which can significantly reduce inference latency and effective computation cost. Accordingly, the service cost incurred by agent i when executing task j is modeled as 

Ci = Ci(Tj , S i, o ij ), which decreases as cache overlap oij 

increases. Each client derives utility from successful task execution, which depends on both output quality and latency. Let Pj (Tj , S i, K i) denote the expected performance or qual-ity of serving task j using agent i, and let Lj (Tj , S i, o ij )

denote the corresponding latency or TTFT. We model the client’s valuation as a weighted combination of these factors: 

vj = δ P j (Tj , S i, K i) − (1 − δ) Lj (Tj , S i, o ij ), (1) where δ ∈ [0 , 1] captures the client’s relative preference between output quality and latency. Task allocation is formulated as a many-to-many matching problem and implemented via a double-auction mechanism. Let xij ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether task j is assigned to agent 

i. Feasible allocations must satisfy 

X

> i∈S

xij ≤ 1, ∀j ∈ C , X

> j∈C

xij ≤ Bi, ∀i ∈ S . (2) Each client has a private valuation vj , while each agent has a private service cost or ask price ci. Given reported bids and asks, the auctioneer determines both the allocation {xij }

and the corresponding payments. Ignoring strategic behav-ior, an efficient allocation maximizes total social welfare: 

W = X

> i∈S

X

> j∈C

 vj − Ci

 xij , (3) subject to the capacity and assignment constraints above. In each periodic auction round, clients and agents submit bids and asks, and the auctioneer applies the matching and pricing algorithm described in §4.2. A key challenge in this setting is that, unlike traditional distributed computing systems, service cost, latency, and performance for LLM-based agents are not deterministic functions of task and resource parameters (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a). Instead, these quantities exhibit sub-stantial variability due to factors such as prompt structure, output length, and cache state. Consequently, prior to run-ning the auction, the platform maintains a predictive model 

M : ( Tj , S i, K i, o ij ) 7 −→ (Ci, P j , L j ),

which estimates the distributions or expectations of cost, performance, and latency. Recent work on LLM routing and scheduling suggests that although these metrics are stochas-tic, they often follow stable distributions conditioned on 

(Tj , S i, K i, o ij ) (Chen et al., 2025a). The auction mecha-nism then operates on these predicted quantities and is de-signed to satisfy feasibility, as well as additional economic desiderata such as incentive compatibility and individual rationality. 

## 4. IEMAS 

IEMAS is an integrated architecture designed to align eco-nomic incentives with system-level efficiency in the open Agentic Web. Unlike prior work on request routing or agent selection that primarily considers scheduling a single task in isolation, large-scale LLM serving in open networks nat-urally induces a many-to-many matching problem between concurrent client requests and heterogeneous agents. In such settings, myopic per-request routing decisions can be socially suboptimal, as they fail to account for capacity constraints, cross-request interactions, and cache locality effects, as empirically demonstrated in §5. Following prior 3IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems Coarse 

Cluster    

> Source
> Sink
> Query 1 Query 2 Query 3
> Agent 1 Agent 2
> 1,0
> 1,-1
> 1,-3
> 1,0
> 1,2
> 1,-2
> 2,0
> 1,-1
> 1,-1
> 2,0
> 1,0

Agent Hub 1 

Proxy    

> KV Cache Knowledge
> KV Cache Knowledge
> KV Cache Knowledge
> Agents
> Auction
> Holder
> Predict
> Model

Prior Agent  

> Result
> Query
> How do different design choices affect
> training expenses in transformers?
> Previous Query
> What methods improve computational
> efficiency in training large transformer
> systems?
> How can we enhance stability during
> training of massive neural models?
> How can we optimize training
> efficiency for large transformer
> models?
> What are effective techniques to
> stabilize large model training
> processes?
> What factors influence the
> training cost of modern
> transformer architectures?
> Hub 2

(a) Coarse Cluster (b) Predict & Auction (c) Optimal Routing 

X, Y

> Flow
> Cost
> Query
> Predicted Metrics
> (Cost, Latency, Quality)

Routing Optimizer (MCMF) 

> Routing
> Optimizer
> Query Batch
> Hub 3
> Signal
> Collector
> Query
> Ledger
> Agent
> Capabilities

Figure 2. IEMAS Overview. (a) Coarse-Grained Clustering: Incoming web queries are first allocated to specific Agent Hubs via a fast, domain-based clustering mechanism. (b) Predictive Auction: A proxy layer utilizes predictive modeling to generate uncertainty-aware bids/asks and executes an auction to match tasks to agents under capacity constraints. (c) Optimization: The allocation is solved as a Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) problem to maximize social welfare based on truthful bidding. 

work, we introduce a proxy hub as a trusted mediator (Wang et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025d), which aggregates infor-mation across requests and agents and computes a joint allocation to achieve socially efficient scheduling. The framework is organized as follows. §4.1 introduces the cache-aware predictive layer that preserves KV-cache local-ity and derives calibrated QoS signals. §4.2 presents a VCG-based mechanism that formulates task–agent assignment as a Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) problem to maximize social welfare. §4.3 analyzes key theoretical properties, in-cluding truthfulness, budget balance, and exactness. Finally, §4.4 describes the Proxy Hub architecture, which improves scalability and enforces economic constraints by clustering agents and localizing matching. Figure 2 and Algorithm 1 provide an overview of the complete workflow. 

4.1. Resource-Aware Predictive Modeling 

IEMAS maintains a predictive model, which estimates these metrics(i.e., latency, cost, and quality) for every candidate pair (i, j ) to drive the auction described in §4.2. The module operates in an online loop: (1) calculate cache-locality, (2) predict QoS, (3) update via bandit feedback. 

Prefix-Locality (KV Reuse Proxy): To estimate the cache affinity oij , the proxy maintains a prefix ledger for each agent i. This ledger stores the text ¯pi,d of the last exe-cuted prompt for a specific dialogue session d. Given a new request j belonging to session d(j) with prompt pj , the proxy computes the Longest Common Prefix (LCP) length 

lij = lcp( pj , ¯pi,d (j)). The affinity score is defined as: 

oij = lij 

max(1 , |pj |) ∈ [0 , 1] . (4) Because the ledger is agent-specific, switching agents for a multi-turn conversation results in oij ≈ 0, correctly captur-ing the loss of locality. 

QoS Online Prediction: IEMAS maintains an indepen-dent predictor gi for each agent i. Each latency and cost predictor uses Hoeffding Tree Regression, and performance predictor uses Hoeffding Tree Classifier. At decision time, we capture system load features: global router inflight/rate (I(r), R (r)) and agent specific inflight/rate ( Ii, R i). We com-pute normalized utilization ui = Ii/ max(1 , B i). For each pair (i, j ), we construct a feature vector: 

xij =  |pj |, t j , ω ij , I (r), R (r), I i, R i, B i, u i, ξ j

, (5) where tj is the turn index and ξj denotes metadata (e.g., domain tag). The Hoeffding Tree predictor outputs the estimates ( ˆLij , ˆCij , ˆQij ) = gi(xij ).To reduce cold-start bias, IEMAS optionally performs a brief startup warm-up by issuing a small number of rep-resentative multi-turn dialogues to each agent to seed the predictors and establish initial cache state; latency labels during warm-up can be kept conservative to avoid one-time initialization artifacts. 

Feedback Accounting: After execution, the proxy records the observed latency Lobs  

> ij

and computes the realized cost 4IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

based on token usage. Let πmiss  

> i

and πhit  

> i

be the prices for uncached (miss) and cached (hit) prompt tokens n, re-spectively. The observed cost is(Bergemann et al., 2025): 

Cobs  

> ij

= πmiss  

> i

(nprompt  

> j

− nhit  

> ij

) + πhit  

> i

nhit  

> ij

+ πout  

> i

ngen  

> j

.

(6) The predictor is updated online by the (Lobs  

> ij

, C obs  

> ij

, P obs  

> ij

),enabling the system to learn the agent’s true performance characteristics and cache behavior over time. It is important to note that prior research has established robust predictive schemes for estimating LLM performance, latency and cost (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a; Feng et al., 2025), as well as advanced KV orchestration tech-niques for fine-gained utilization, such as CacheBlend (Yao et al., 2025). Our work distinguishes itself by focusing on the mechanism design layer rather than low-level estimation or memory virtualization. IEMAS treats these system-level metrics as inputs to guide incentive-compatible auction val-uations. Consequently, our framework is modular: state-of-the-art predictive models or novel KV management tech-niques can be seamlessly coupled into the IEMAS proxy to further enhance auction precision and resource efficiency. 

4.2. Multi-Agent Matching Mechanisms 

Efficient allocation relies on clients truthfully revealing their utilities to avoid market failure. Since agent service costs are transparently quantified by the proxy via Eq 6, we assume agent costs are honest and restrict our incentive analysis to the strategic behavior of clients. To elicit truthful participation, IEMAS adopts a welfare-maximizing allocation rule with VCG-style payments. Given a set of client requests Tj and a set of agents S, the proxy hub constructs candidate request–agent pairs (i, j )

and derives scalarized valuations ˆvi,j and costs ˆci,j from the predictive models described in §4.1. The net welfare contribution of assigning request j to agent j is denoted by 

wi,j = ˆ vi,j − ˆci,j ,

and pairs with wi,j < 0 are discarded to avoid inefficient matches. The proxy hub then solves the following welfare-maximization problem: 

max  

> x

W (C) = X

> j∈C

X

> i∈S

wi,j xi,j (7) s.t. X

> i∈S

xi,j ≤ 1, ∀j ∈ C, 

X

> j∈C

xi,j ≤ qi, ∀i ∈ S, xi,j ∈ { 0, 1},

where qi denotes the maximum number of concurrent re-quests agent i can serve. Problem (7) is a maximum-weight bipartite b-matching problem and admits a polynomial-time solution via a min-cost max-flow (MCMF) reduction. Specifically, shown in Figure 2(c), we construct a flow net-work with a source connected to each task node with unit capacity, task-to-agent edges of unit capacity and cost −wi,j ,and agent-to-sink edges with capacity qi. The edge owns positive cost will be discarded to avoid inefficient matches. Any integral min-cost max-flow in this network corresponds to a feasible matching that minimizes total cost, and hence maximizes total welfare. Given the welfare-maximizing allocation, IEMAS imple-ments VCG (Clarke pivot) payments to ensure incentive compatibility. Let W (C) denote the optimal welfare of (7) and W (C \ { j}) the optimal welfare when request j is removed. If client request j is matched to agent i in the optimal allocation, its VCG payment is defined as 

pj = W (C \ { j}) −  W (C) − wi,j 

 + ci,j , (8) which equals the externality that request j imposes on all other participants. This mechanism is ex-post efficient and dominant-strategy incentive compatible for clients. Sym-metric payments or rebates can be defined for agents when needed. While VCG mechanisms do not, in general, guarantee bud-get balance—the total payments collected from clients may differ from the total compensation paid to agents—they pro-vide a principled benchmark for truthful, welfare-optimal allocation. Moreover, although computing VCG pay-ments na ¨ıvely requires resolving (7) once per request, in practice this overhead can be significantly reduced using warm-started min-cost flow solvers and incremental re-optimization within each proxy hub. 

4.3. Algorithmic properties 

In this section, we provide a formal analysis of the eco-nomic and algorithmic properties of IEMAS. Specifically, we demonstrate that the coupling of the Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) algorithm with the VCG payment rule is theoretically sound. We prove that the flow-based allo-cation is exact—a strict prerequisite for VCG truthful-ness—thereby resolving the potential conflict between com-putational tractability and incentive compatibility. 

Exactness of Allocation via MCMF: The validity of VCG relies strictly on the allocation rule being allocatively effi-cient (i.e., finding the global maximum of the welfare func-tion). If the allocation algorithm were an approximation, the dominant-strategy equilibrium of VCG would collapse. We show that our flow-based formulation is exact. Recall the welfare maximization problem defined in Eq. 7. Let G = ( V, E ) be the constructed bipartite flow network. We map the welfare weights wij to edge costs such that 

cost ij = −wij .5IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

Theorem 4.1 (Allocative Efficiency ). The assignment x∗

produced by the Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) algorithm in the IEMAS flow network maximizes the total social welfare 

W (C) subject to capacity constraints. Proof. See Appendix A.1. 

Incentive Compatibility: Having established that MCMF yields the optimal allocation x∗, we now prove that the mechanism elicits truthful reporting of client value vi.

Theorem 4.2 (Dominant Strategy Incentive Compatibil-ity for Clients ). Assuming truthful agents, reporting the true valuation vi is a dominant strategy for every client 

i ∈ C under the IEMAS mechanism. Proof. See Appendix A.2. 

Budget Balance. While standard VCG mechanisms are not generally budget-balanced, the specific asymmetry of our market design—where agent costs are verifiable via the proxy and clients are the primary strategic actors—allows us to guarantee that the system never runs a financial deficit. 

Theorem 4.3 (Weak Budget Balance ). The IEMAS mech-anism satisfies ex-post weak budget balance. The total pay-ment collected from clients is sufficient to cover the total service costs incurred by agents: 

X

> j∈C matched

pj ≥ X

> i∈S active

ci. (9) 

Proof. See Appendix A.3. 

Computational Consistency: While VCG theoretically re-quires resolving the optimization problem |S| + 1 times, the coupling with MCMF mitigates this overhead. The compu-tation of W (C \{ i}) is equivalent to finding a minimum-cost flow adjustment on the residual graph Gf obtained after the initial allocation x∗ (Ahuja et al., 1993). By reusing the dual potentials (conceptually similar to Johnson’s re-weighting algorithm) from the primary solution, the marginal cost of computing payments is significantly lower than solving from scratch (Hershberger & Suri, 2001). Furthermore, in bipartite assignment settings, it has been established that VCG payments can often be derived directly from the opti-mal dual variables of the linear relaxation, rendering the re-optimization step efficient or even instantaneous (Leonard, 1983). This ensures the mechanism remains practical for real-time routing. 

4.4. Agentic Hub Architecture 

The system model described above faces two fundamen-tal challenges when deployed in large-scale, open LLM agent networks. First , realistic deployments may involve hundreds or thousands of independently operated agents and a high volume of concurrent client requests. Per-forming global all-to-all prediction, auction, and schedul-ing—especially during the performance estimation and VCG matching phases—would incur prohibitive latency, communication overhead, and computational cost. Sec-ond , when agent heterogeneity is substantial, VCG-based mechanisms may violate individual rationality (IR) con-straints (Liu et al., 2025), as implied by the Green–Laffont impossibility theorem, which precludes the simultaneous satisfaction of incentive compatibility, individual rational-ity, budget balance, and allocative efficiency in general set-tings (Green & Laffont, 1977). We demonstrate this effect in Appendix B.1. To address these limitations, prior work has shown that 

clustering-based decomposition is an effective supplement to incentive mechanisms: it bounds problem size, enables parallel intra-cluster computation, and mitigates IR conflicts by reducing heterogeneity within each market (Liu et al., 2025). Building on this insight, IEMAS adopts a proxy-hub architecture to support scalable and incentive-aware scheduling in heterogeneous LLM ecosystems. Specifically, agents service pods are clustered a priori into multiple proxy hubs according to relatively static capability signals, such as model scale, domain specialization, and benchmarked performance (e.g., OpenCompass evaluations (Contributors, 2023)). Incoming client requests are first routed to an ap-propriate hub using a lightweight, coarse-grained classifier based on task domain and quality-of-service requirements. Fine-grained IEMAS routing, prediction, and VCG-based matching are then executed locally within the selected hub. This two-stage routing and allocation process substantially reduces the dimensionality of the matching problem while preserving the economic efficiency benefits of incentive-aware scheduling. Each proxy hub acts as a mediation layer providing authen-tication, admission control, fine-grained accounting, and KV-cache management, thereby decoupling global market coordination from low-level inference execution. Instead of continuous real-time communication, proxy hubs pe-riodically publish standardized, privacy-preserving meta-data—such as price signals, available capacity, and compact cache-state summaries—which is sufficient for constructing efficient matchings while reducing bandwidth overhead and protecting proprietary model details. Furthermore, since the incentive mechanisms in §4.2 operate on bipartite request– agent graphs, proxy hubs naturally host auction execution, VCG payment computation, and cache-aware scheduling. By maintaining local KV-prefix ledger in §4.1, proxies en-able reuse-aware matching without exposing raw prompts, model parameters, or inference traces. This separation of concerns allows IEMAS to achieve scalability, economic robustness, cache efficiency, and privacy-preserving dis-6IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

tributed inference at Internet scale. Implementation details are deferred to Appendix C. 

## 5. Experiments 

We evaluate IEMAS on critical dimensions: (1) System Efficiency , measuring whether cache-aware routing reduces latency and overhead; (2) Economic Robustness , verify-ing that the mechanism incentivizes truthful reporting and maximizes social welfare. 

5.1. Experimental Setup Experimental Setup. We profiled the vLLM inference en-gine (Kwon et al., 2023) on heterogeneous nodes equipped with NVIDIA RTX 4090 and RTX 6000 GPUs. To faith-fully simulate the resource constraints and frequent cache evictions typical of open agent networks, we fixed the concurrent query batch buffer size at 12 and restricted the vLLM gpu memory utilization parameter to 0.6. Our agent population is instantiated with a diverse set of models, including LLaMA-3-7B (Dubey et al., 2024), Qwen-4B, and Qwen-8B (Yang et al., 2025a). We evaluate system performance across three distinct interaction modal-ities: CoQA (Reddy et al., 2019) for multi-turn dialogue preservation, QuAC (Choi et al., 2018) for long-context handling, and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) for complex reasoning tasks. We compare IEMAS against five routing strategies: • GraphRouter (Feng et al., 2025): a graph-based LLM router that models tasks, queries, and models as a hetero-geneous graph for effect/cost estimation. • GMTRouter (Xie et al., 2025): a personalized router using a heterogeneous graph to capture user–query–model interaction preferences. • MFRouter (Ong et al., 2025): a matrix factorization-based router that treats routing as a recommendation. • RouterDC (Chen et al., 2024): a dual-contrastive learn-ing router that fine-tunes a pre-trained language model to align query representations. • Random: routes queries uniformly at random as a non-learned baseline. 

5.2. System Efficiency 

We evaluate resource reuse efficiency via the KV-cache hit rate, Latency, and Service Cost, as detailed in Table 1. 

KV Cache Reuse. On multi-turn datasets where context retention is critical, IEMAS demonstrates superior affinity scheduling. Specifically, on CoQA , IEMAS achieves a dom-inant cache hit rate of 80.2% , significantly outperforming the strongest baseline (GMTRouter at 53.1%). Even on long-context tasks like QuAC , IEMAS maintains a 63.6% 

hit rate compared to the baseline average of ∼30-40%. This confirms that our affinity-scoring mechanism successfully preserves context locality even in complex dialogue scenar-ios. 

Latency Reduction. The impact of cache reuse on TTFT is evident in the Lat column. On the HotpotQA reasoning benchmark, IEMAS reduces median latency to 284.2ms ,avoiding the severe congestion observed in RouterDC (2139.8ms) and outperforming GMTRouter (372.0ms). Sim-ilarly, on QuAC , IEMAS achieves the lowest latency of 

162.1ms , a 1.9 × speedup over MFRouter (306.2ms), by consistently routing follow-up queries to agents holding the active KV-prefix and bypassing the prefill phase. 

Cost Efficiency. Maximizing cache hit rates directly trans-lates to economic savings. On CoQA, IEMAS yields an average cost of 6.944 , representing a ≈35% reduction 

compared to the next most efficient method (MFRouter at 10.507) and a massive reduction compared to Random rout-ing (13.65). While HotpotQA exhibits lower overall cache reuse (0.089) due to task nature, IEMAS still achieves the lowest cost ( 28.694 ) among all methods, proving that the VCG-based mechanism effectively optimizes for cost even when cache opportunities are scarce. 

5.3. Predictive Accuracy 

The efficiency of the auction mechanism hinges on the Proxy Hub’s ability to accurately calibrate agent Latency ( L), Cost (C), and Accuracy ( P ). As illustrated in Figure 3, our online Hoeffding Tree predictor demonstrates robust predictive ca-pability across multi-turn interactions. The figure compares observed versus predicted values over 20 turns, revealing tight alignment between the model’s estimates and ground truth. Specifically, the model achieves a low Normalized Mean Absolute Error (NMAE) of 0.101 for latency and 

0.090 for cost, effectively capturing the non-linear increase in resource consumption as context length grows. Further-more, accuracy prediction remains stable with an NMAE of 0.069 , acting as a reliable expected value filter against the stochastic noise of observed performance, ensuring the auction mechanism operates on calibrated risk bounds. 

5.4. Economic Analysis: Truthfulness and Welfare 

A core contribution of IEMAS is Incentive Compatibility (IC). We validate this by introducing strategic agents who attempt to game the system. 

Truthfulness Validation. We simulate four agent bidding strategy: Honest, aggressive, conservative and random who report truthful, consistly high/low and random based on the true value. Figure 5 illustrates the cumulative utility (profit) over 100 auction rounds. Under the VCG-based payment rule, truthful agents see steady profit growth. In contrast, the other strategic agents incur penalties due to performance 7IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems Method CoQA (Multi-turn) QuAC (Long Context) HotpotQA (Reasoning) KV (%) Cost Lat (ms) KV (%) Cost Lat (ms) KV (%) Cost Lat (ms) 

GraphRouter 0.364 10.655 423.2 0.310 17.404 443.1 0.042 42.243 1470.3 GMTRouter 0.531 11.946 342.2 0.319 25.302 472.6 0.048 44.365 372.0 MFRouter 0.384 10.507 414.5 0.488 15.372 306.2 0.054 39.101 389.2 RouterDC 0.482 9.527 357.5 0.242 19.443 404.9 0.046 34.180 2139.8 Random 0.165 13.65 452.6 0.343 24.927 189.1 0.044 43.683 404.4 

IEMAS (Ours) 0.802 6.944 354.5 0.636 15.868 162.1 0.089 28.694 284.2 

Table 1. Average System Efficiency Comparison across three benchmarks. KV (%) denotes cache hit rate ( ↑) and Lat is the TTFT ( ↓). 4 8 12 16 20 

Turn Number 

> 200
> 400
> 600
> Latency (ms)

NMAE turn = 0.098     

> 4812 16 20

Turn Number 

> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> Cost (USD/M token)

NMAE turn = 0.096     

> 4812 16 20

Turn Number 

> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Accuracy

NMAE turn = 0.040        

> Observed Predicted Observed p25 p75 Predicted p25 p75

Figure 3. The Predictive Model for QoS Factors of CoQA dataset. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150  

> Dialogue Turns
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Cumulative Welfare
> ×10 4
> IEMAS
> GMT-Router
> Router-DC
> MF-Router
> Graph-Router
> Random

Figure 4. Social Welfare Comparison. 0 25 50 75 100 

> Auction Rounds
> 100
> 0
> 100
> 200
> Cumulative Utility ($)  Honest
> Random
> Conservative
> Aggressive

Figure 5. The Utility under Different Auction Strategies in VCG Auction. 1 2 5 10 20 

> Number of Clusters (Granularity)
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> VCG Calculation Cost (ms)
> Calculation Cost
> Norm. Welfare
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> 1.05
> Normalized Social Welfare

Figure 6. The Social Welfare and Time Cost under Different Clus-ter Levels in Routing. 

deviations, resulting in strictly low profit at any round. This empirically demonstrates that truth-telling is a dominant strategy in IEMAS. 

Clustering Trade-off Analysis. To quantify the balance between computational scalability and allocative efficiency, we conducted a sensitivity analysis by varying the number of proxy hub clusters K. We maintained a constant global environment of M = 100 agents and N = 200 concur-rent tasks. As illustrated in Figure 6, increasing K leads to a sharp reduction in solver latency, as the complexity of the Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) algorithm scales super-linearly with problem size. Crucially, this performance gain incurs only a marginal degradation in global social welfare. The results confirm that domain-based clustering effectively partitions the market, significantly reducing scheduling over-head while maintaining near-optimal allocation efficiency. We further analysis the effect of different clustering schemes in Appendix B.1. 

Social Welfare. We define Social Welfare as the cumulative sum of client utility minus agent costs over the session du-ration. Figure 4 illustrates the welfare accumulation across 160 dialogue turns. IEMAS consistently maintains the steep-est growth trajectory, demonstrating superior long-term ef-ficiency. While state-of-the-art baselines like GMT-Router 

and Router-DC track closely, IEMAS maintains a sustained lead, exceeding all baselines by the final turn. This gap high-lights the advantage of our incentive-compatible mechanism: by explicitly pricing cache affinity in the VCG valuation, IEMAS minimizes the cost of context that degrades the net utility of other routing strategies over long horizons. In contrast, the Random baseline fails to generate meaningful welfare, validating the necessity of intelligent coordination. 

## 6. Conclusion 

The transition to an open Internet of Agents requires rec-onciling the strategic autonomy of decentralized providers with the physical realities of efficient LLM inference. In this work, we introduced IEMAS , a routing framework that bridges this gap by treating the KV-cache not merely as a system buffer, but as a pricable economic asset. By co-designing a resource-aware predictive model with a truthful VCG mechanism, IEMAS solves the fundamental tension between maximizing global social welfare and ensuring individual rationality. Our theoretical analysis confirms that the mechanism guarantees truthful reporting and weak budget balance. Empirically, extensive simulations demon-strate that this alignment yields tangible performance gains: IEMAS achieves an 80% KV-cache hit rate, reduces av-erage service cost by 35% , and lowers end-to-end latency by 2.9 × compared to state-of-the-art baselines. These re-sults suggest that rigorous mechanism design, when tightly coupled with system-level observables, is a prerequisite for scaling the future Agentic Web. 8IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Ahuja, R. K., Magnanti, T. L., and Orlin, J. B. Network flows: theory, algorithms, and applications . Prentice hall, 1993. Aminiranjbar, Z., Tang, J., Wang, Q., Pant, S., and Viswanathan, M. Dawn: Designing distributed agents in a worldwide network. IEEE Access , 2025. Bansal, G., Hua, W., Huang, Z., Fourney, A., Swearngin, A., Epperson, W., Payne, T., Hofman, J. M., Lucier, B., Singh, C., et al. Magentic marketplace: An open-source environment for studying agentic markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25779 , 2025. Bergemann, D., Bonatti, A., and Smolin, A. The economics of large language models: Token allocation, fine-tuning, and optimal pricing. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , pp. 786– 786, 2025. Chen, J., Shi, J., Chen, Q., and Guo, M. Kairos: Low-latency multi-agent serving with shared llms and excessive loads in the public cloud. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06948 ,2025a. Chen, S., Jiang, W., Lin, B., Kwok, J., and Zhang, Y. Rou-terdc: Query-based router by dual contrastive learning for assembling large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Chen, W., You, Z., Li, R., Qian, C., Zhao, C., Yang, C., Xie, R., Liu, Z., Sun, M., et al. Internet of agents: Weaving a web of heterogeneous agents for collaborative intelli-gence. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Chen, W., You, Z., Li, R., Qian, C., Zhao, C., Yang, R., et al. Internet of agents: Weaving a web of heterogeneous agents for collaborative intelligence. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025b. Choi, E., He, H., Iyyer, M., Yatskar, M., Yih, W.-t., Choi, Y., Liang, P., and Zettlemoyer, L. Quac: Question answering in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07036 , 2018. Clarke, E. H. Multipart pricing of public goods. Public choice , 11(1):17–33, 1971. Contributors, O. Opencompass: A universal evaluation platform for foundation models. https://github. com/open-compass/opencompass , 2023. Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan, A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2407, 2024. Feng, T., Shen, Y., and You, J. Graphrouter: A graph-based router for llm selections. In ICLR , 2025. Gim, I., Chen, G., Lee, S.-s., Sitaraman, R., Wang, J., and Wei, G.-Y. Prompt cache: Modular attention reuse for low-latency inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04934 ,2024. Green, J. and Laffont, J.-J. Characterization of satisfactory mechanisms for the revelation of preferences for pub-lic goods. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pp. 427–438, 1977. Guo, T., Chen, X., Wang, Y., Chang, R., Pei, S., Chawla, N. V., Wiest, O., and Zhang, X. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. In IJCAI , 2024. Guo, Z., Zhou, Y., Wang, C., You, L., Bian, M., and Zhang, W. Betaweb: Towards a blockchain-enabled trustworthy agentic web. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13787 , 2025. Hershberger, J. and Suri, S. Vickrey prices and shortest paths: What is an edge worth? In Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science ,pp. 252–259. IEEE, 2001. Hoffman, A. J. and Kruskal, J. B. Integral boundary points of convex polyhedra. In Linear Inequalities and Related Systems , volume 38 of Annals of Mathematics Studies ,pp. 223–246. Princeton University Press, 1956. Hong, S., Zhuge, M., Chen, J., Zheng, X., Cheng, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, C., Wang, Z., Yau, S. K. S., Lin, Z., Zhou, L., Ran, C., Xiao, L., Wu, C., and Schmidhuber, J. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collabo-rative framework. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=VtmBAGCN7o .Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu, C. H., Gonzalez, J. E., Zhang, H., and Stoica, I. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’23) ,pp. XXX–XXX, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613165. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180 .9IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

Leonard, H. B. Elicitation of honest preferences for the as-signment of individuals to positions. Journal of Political Economy , 91(3):461–479, 1983. Li, G., Hammoud, H. A. A. K., Itani, H., Khizanishvili, D., and Ghanem, B. Camel: Communicative agents for ”mind” exploration of large language model society. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Liu, H., Wang, M., Liu, J., Yuan, S., Lou, J., Wu, C., and Li, J. Cast: Cluster-driven truthful crowdfunding mechanism for shared ai service deployment. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing , 2025. Microsoft. Deepspeed-mii: High-performance inference for large models, 2023. URL https://github.com/ microsoft/DeepSpeed-MII .Ong, I., Amouyal, K., Levine, Y., et al. Routellm: Learn-ing to route llms with preference data. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Pan, Z., PATEL, A., Shen, Y., Hu, Z., Guan, Y., Li, W.-L., Qin, L., Wang, Y., and Ding, Y. Kvflow: Efficient prefix caching for accelerating llm-based multi-agent workflows. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems .Patel, P., Choukse, E., Zhang, C., Shah, A., Neiswanger, W., and Wang, Y. Splitwise: Efficient generative llm in-ference using phase splitting. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architec-ture (ISCA) , 2024. Qiu, H., Zhu, K., Luong, N. C., Yi, C., Niyato, D., and Kim, D. I. Applications of auction and mechanism design in edge computing: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , 8(2):1034– 1058, 2022. Reddy, S., Chen, D., and Manning, C. D. Coqa: A conversa-tional question answering challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 7:249–266, 2019. Schrijver, A. Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency , volume 24. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003. Sheng, Y., Cao, S., Li, D., Hooper, C., Lee, N., Yang, S., Chou, C., Bang, B., Treviso, D., Gonzalez, J. E., et al. S-lora: Serving thousands of concurrent lora adapters. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03285 , 2023. Sun, B., Huang, Z., Zhao, H., Xiao, W., Zhang, X., Li, Y., and Lin, W. Llumnix: Dynamic scheduling for large language model serving. In 18th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 24) ,pp. 173–191, 2024. Vickrey, W. Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders. The Journal of finance , 16(1):8–37, 1961. Wang, Y., Su, Z., Pan, Y., Luan, T. H., Li, R., and Yu, S. Social-aware clustered federated learning with cus-tomized privacy preservation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking , 2024. Wang, Y., Guo, S., Pan, Y., Su, Z., Chen, F., Luan, T. H., Li, P., Kang, J., and Niyato, D. Internet of agents: Funda-mentals, applications, and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , 2025. doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3623369. URL https:// ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10834360 .Wu, T. et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm appli-cations via multi-agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. Xie, E., Sun, Y., Feng, T., and You, J. Gmtrouter: Personal-ized llm router over multi-turn user interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08590 , 2025. Xie, T., Zhou, F., Cheng, Z., Shi, P., Weng, L., Liu, Y., Hua, T. J., Zhao, J., Liu, Q., et al. Openagents: An open platform for language agents in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10634 , 2023. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025a. Yang, Y., Chai, H., Shao, S., Song, Y., Qi, S., Rui, R., and Zhang, W. Agentnet: Decentralized evolutionary coordination for llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00587 , 2025b. Yang, Y., Ma, M., Huang, Y., Chai, H., Gong, C., Geng, H., Zhou, Y., Wen, Y., Fang, M., Chen, M., et al. Agentic web: Weaving the next web with ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21206 , 2025c. Yang, Y., Wen, Y., Wang, J., and Zhang, W. Agent exchange: Shaping the future of ai agent economics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03904 , 2025d. Yang, Z., Qi, P., Zhang, S., Bengio, Y., Cohen, W., Salakhut-dinov, R., and Manning, C. D. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In 

Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pp. 2369–2380, 2018. Yao, J., Li, H., Liu, Y., Ray, S., Cheng, Y., Zhang, Q., Du, K., Lu, S., and Jiang, J. Cacheblend: Fast large language model serving for rag with cached knowledge fusion. In 10 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems , pp. 94–109, 2025. Ye, D., Cai, S., Du, H., Kang, J., Liu, Y., Yu, R., and Niyato, D. Optimizing aigc services by prompt engineering and edge computing: A generative diffusion model-based con-tract theory approach. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , 2024. You, F., Yuan, X., Ni, W., and Jamalipour, A. Privacy-preserving multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for effective resource auction in multi-access edge computing. 

IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , 2024. Yu, G.-I., Jeong, J. S., Kim, G.-W., Kim, S., and Chun, B.-G. Orca: A distributed serving system for Transformer-based generative models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) , pp. 521–538, 2022. Zheng, L., Li, L., Zhang, H., Zhuang, S., Chen, Z., Huang, Y., Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I. Sglang: Efficient ex-ecution of structured language model programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07104 , 2023. Zhong, Y., Tong, Y., Kang, J., Dai, M., Dai, H.-N., Su, Z., and Niyato, D. Hybrid stackelberg game and diffusion-based auction for two-tier agentic ai task offloading in in-ternet of agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22076 , 2025. 11 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

## A. Proof 

A.1. Efficiency 

The MCMF algorithm minimizes the total cost function on the network: 

min 

> f

X

> (u,v )∈E

cost uv · fuv ⇐⇒ max 

> x

X

> i∈S

X

> j∈C

wij xij (10) The constraint matrix A of this bipartite matching problem corresponds to the node-edge incidence matrix. The rows represent flow conservation constraints at Task nodes j (capacity 1) and Agent nodes i (capacity Bi). By the Hoffman-Kruskal Theorem (Hoffman & Kruskal, 1956), the incidence matrix of a bipartite graph is Totally Unimodular (TU). A fundamental property of TU matrices is that for any integral capacity vector b (here, 1 and Bi are integers), the polyhedron of feasible solutions P = {x|Ax ≤ b, x ≥ 0} has integral vertices (Schrijver, 2003). Consequently, the solution found by the MCMF algorithm—which solves the linear relaxation of the problem—is guaranteed to be integral ( x∗ 

> ij

∈ { 0, 1}). Since MCMF provides an exact solution to the minimum cost circulation problem, the resulting allocation x∗ is the global maximizer of social welfare. 

A.2. Truthfulness 

Let uj (ˆ vj , v −j ) denote the utility of client i when reporting valuation ˆvj , while other clients report v−j . The utility is defined as the realized value minus the payment: uj = vj − pj (11) Substitute the VCG payment rule from Eq. (8) into the utility function. Note that W (C) depends on the reported ˆvj , so we expand W (C) = (ˆ vj − ci,j ) + P  

> k̸=j

w∗ 

> k,s k

, where the sum represents the optimal welfare of all other matched pairs in the presence of j.

uj = vj − [W (C \ { j}) − (W (C) − (ˆ vj − ci,j )) + ci,j ]= vj − W (C \ { j}) + W (C) − ˆvj + ci,j − ci,j 

= ( vj − ˆvj ) + W (C) − W (C \ { j}) (12) If the client reports truthfully such that ˆvj = vj , the term (vj − ˆvj ) vanishes: 

uj = W (C)

| {z } 

> Total Social Welfare

− W (C \ { j})

| {z } 

> Constant independent of j

(13) The term W (C \ { j}) represents the system welfare if client j were absent, which is independent of client j’s strategy. Thus, maximizing individual utility uj is mathematically equivalent to maximizing the total social welfare W (C). Since the MCMF algorithm finds the exact allocation that maximizes W (C) based on reported values, the client maximizes their own utility uj if and only if they provide the true valuation vj that allows the mechanism to optimize the true social welfare. Under-reporting or over-reporting vj may lead to a suboptimal allocation (or no allocation) that yields a strictly lower utility. 

A.3. Budget Balance 

Consider a single matched transaction between client j and agent i. The platform collects pj from the client and compensates the agent ci,j . The platform’s net surplus for this transaction is: 

∆j = pj − ci,j 

Using Eq. (8): ∆j = [ W (C \ { j}) − (W (C) − wi,j ) + ci,j ] − ci,j 

∆j = W (C \ { j}) −  W (C) − wi,j 

 (14) Here, W (C \ { j}) represents the maximum social welfare achievable by the remaining participants without client j. The term (W (C) − wi,j ) represents the actual welfare of the remaining participants in the optimal allocation with client j

present. Since agent capacity is finite (resource contention), the presence of client j can only decrease or leave unchanged the aggregate welfare available to others (by consuming a slot that might have gone to another high-value task). It cannot increase the welfare of others. Therefore: 

W (C \ { j}) ≥ W (C) − wi,j =⇒ ∆j ≥ 0. (15) 12 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

Since the surplus ∆j is non-negative for every matched request, the sum over all requests is non-negative. 

Remark: The non-negative surplus P ∆i represents the ”information rent” or externality tax collected by the protocol. In the IEMAS implementation, this surplus can be retained by the Hub as a maintenance fee or redistributed to agents as a long-term participation incentive (e.g., staking rewards) without violating the budget constraint. 

## B. Extended Analysis 

B.1. Cluster Strategy Effect Analysis 

As discussed in Section 4.2, IEMAS employs the VCG mechanism to ensure incentive compatibility. While theoretically robust, the computational cost of calculating Clarke pivot payments is substantial. Specifically, calculating the externality for each request requires resolving the Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) problem N times for N concurrent requests. In a global, flat market with thousands of agents, this O(N · TM CM F ) complexity becomes prohibitive for real-time inference routing. To address this, Section 4.4 introduces a hierarchical Proxy Hub architecture. While clustering agents reduces the search space—potentially lowering the theoretical global maximum social welfare (SW)—our analysis shows that the specific characteristics of LLM inference mitigate this loss. 

Market Fragmentation vs. Cache Locality. In generic resource allocation, partitioning agents into disjoint clusters restricts the solution space, creating a ”Fragmentation Penalty” where a task cannot access an idle agent in a different cluster. However, LLM inference efficiency is dominated by KV-cache locality. Global routing often suffers from context thrashing, where semantically similar queries are dispersed. By clustering agents based on domain specialization (as verified in Appendix A.1), the system maximizes intra-cluster cache reuse ( oij ). This gain in execution efficiency (lower cost Ci and latency Lj ) effectively offsets the loss in matching optionality. Full-Mix Ideal Task-Mix Agent-Mix 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Monetary Value

1e3 

841 841 

414 

661 

812 812 

538 

1067 

244 244 

72 

421 

## Welfare 

## Pivot Payment 

## Budget Balance 

## Neg Client % 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

> Neg. Utility (%)

4.3% 4.3% 

15.0% 

26.1%  

> Figure 7. The Economics Performance under Different Cluster Schemes.

Full-Mix is a heterogeneous baseline with no prior alignment between tasks and agents. Ideal represents homogeneous alignment, where tasks and agents are pre-clustered to minimize matching entropy. Task-Mix clusters agents by specialization while tasks remain heterogeneous, whereas Agent-Mix clusters tasks while agents remain heterogeneous, assessing how each side absorbs structural mismatch. Figure 7 shows that reasonable cluster can cause ideal situation, which can maintain high social benefits and achieve similar results as Full-Mix. However one-sided centric clustering method such as Task-Mix or Agent-Mix can cause task congestion and cutthroat competition as high-level agent service resource are relatively limited, which can reduce social welfare, increase negative client and influence IR. 13 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

## C. System Integration and Implement  

> Figure 8. The System Structure of IEMAS

This appendix details the software architecture and implementation logic of IEMAS. The system is designed as an asynchronous, event-driven proxy service that acts as an intelligent router between a high-throughput client load generator and a heterogeneous pool of Large Language Model (LLM) backends. The implementation relies primarily on Python’s 

asyncio for concurrency and FastAPI for the web service layer. The architecture is divided into three primary functional blocks: the Client (load generation), the Router (state management, prediction, and allocation), and the Backend Interface (protocol translation and telemetry). 

C.1. Client Implementation 

The client module ( iemas.client ) implements a pure load generator designed to stress-test the routing infrastructure using the CoQA dataset. 

State Management and Concurrency. The client executes multiple dialogues concurrently using asyncio.gather .Within each dialogue task ( run dialogue ), turns are executed sequentially to preserve conversational causality—Turn 

N must complete before Turn N + 1 begins. The client maintains a local conversation history list, appending user questions and assistant answers verbatim as they occur. Concurrency is controlled via a global asyncio.Semaphore 

(max concurrency ), ensuring a fixed upper bound on the number of simultaneous active requests. 

Protocol and Tracing. Unlike standard benchmarks that might maintain a persistent connection, the client initiates a fresh HTTP POST request for every turn to the router’s /v1/chat/completions endpoint. To enable the router to track sessions across these stateless HTTP requests, the client injects custom tracing headers: • X-IEMAS-RUN-ID : A unique identifier for the experiment run. • X-IEMAS-DIALOGUE-ID : The unique ID of the current conversation. • X-IEMAS-TURN-NUMBER : The monotonic turn index (1-based). • X-IEMAS-SOURCE : The provenance of the dialogue text. 14 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

C.2. Router Architecture 

The router ( iemas.router ) acts as the central decision-making entity. It does not perform inference itself but routes requests to backend endpoints defined in a YAML configuration file. C.2.1. A SYNCHRONOUS MICRO -B ATCHING 

To enable collective decision-making (such as auctions) rather than greedy per-request routing, the router imple-ments a MicroBatcher component. Incoming requests are not processed immediately; they are wrapped in a 

PendingChatCompletion object containing the request body and an unresolved asyncio.Future .These pending objects are submitted to the MicroBatcher , which buffers them into an asyncio.Queue . The batcher yields a batch for processing when one of two conditions is met: 1. Size Threshold: The queue size reaches max batch size (e.g., 16 requests). 2. Time Threshold: The oldest request in the queue has waited for max wait ms (e.g., 10ms). This mechanism ensures that the overhead of batching remains bounded by a tight latency budget. The batcher runs as a background task ( run loop ) and invokes a callback handler ( handle chat batch ) for every emitted batch. C.2.2. P REFIX CACHING AND STATE TRACKING 

Effective routing requires estimating the state of the Key-Value (KV) cache at each backend without direct access to backend memory. The router maintains a local TextPrefixCache .

Data Structure. The cache is a dictionary mapping the tuple (backend id, model, dialogue id) to the full text of the prompt used in the previous turn. 

Feature Extraction. For every request in a micro-batch, the router computes the Longest Common Prefix (LCP) between the current request’s serialized prompt and the cached text for each candidate backend. This computation yields a ratio 

(LCP length / prompt length) and lcp chars , which serve as proxy features for the backend’s actual KV cache hit rate. 

Eviction Heuristic. The router implements a heuristic eviction policy ( should evict router prefix cache ). If a backend reports zero cached tokens in its usage statistics despite a high router-side prefix match, the router infers that the backend has evicted the KV cache and invalidates its own local record to resync state. C.2.3. O NLINE PREDICTION SUBSYSTEM 

The system employs an AsyncBackendPredictorPool to manage online learning models. To prevent interference between the learning processes of different backends, the system maintains a separate, independent AgentPredictor 

instance for each backend. 

Feature Engineering. The PredictorInput dataclass aggregates features at routing time. These include: • Request Features: Prompt length (characters), turn number. • Cache Features: The computed kvmatch text ratio. • System Load: Router-wide inflight requests and global Requests Per Second (RPS). • Local Load: Backend-specific metrics including backend inflight , backend rps , and utilization (inflight divided by capacity). 

Model Updates. The predictors utilize Hoeffding Trees (HoeffdingTreeRegressor ,

HoeffdingTreeClassifier ) from the river library. They support partial fit via the learn one 

method, allowing the system to update the model incrementally immediately after a request completes. 15 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

C.2.4. A UCTION -B ASED ROUTING LOGIC 

When the routing policy is set to auction , the router executes the select backends auction function. 

Graph Construction. The allocation problem is modeled as a Min-Cost Max-Flow (MCMF) network flow graph: • A Source node connects to all Request nodes with capacity 1 and cost 0. • Request nodes connect to Backend nodes. An edge exists only if the calculated welfare for that assignment is positive. The capacity is 1, and the cost is set to negative welfare (since standard solvers minimize cost). • Backend nodes connect to a Sink node with capacity equal to the backend’s available concurrency slots. 

Solver. The router includes a custom, dependency-free implementation of the Successive Shortest Path algorithm (iemas.router.auction.mcmf ). It uses Bellman-Ford potentials to handle negative edge costs and Dijkstra’s algorithm for finding augmenting paths. 

VCG Payment Calculation. To ensure economic robustness, the system calculates Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) payments. This requires calculating the ”externality” a request imposes on others. For a batch of size N , the router runs the MCMF solver N + 1 times: once to find the optimal allocation, and once for each request i (removing i from the graph) to calculate the counterfactual welfare. C.2.5. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

To provide a ground-truth signal for the performance predictor, the router evaluates response correctness asynchronously using the PerformanceEvaluator protocol. Two implementations are provided: • RougeCoqaEvaluator : Computes ROUGE-1/2/L F1 scores against the dataset gold answer. • TokenSpanCoqaEvaluator : A deterministic evaluator that normalizes the text (lowercasing, number normalization) and checks if the gold answer tokens appear as a contiguous subsequence in the model output. 

C.3. Backend Interface and Deployment 

The IEMAS router abstracts the underlying inference engines through a unified protocol layer defined in 

iemas.router.components.backend . This layer manages connection pooling, protocol translation, and high-fidelity telemetry injection. While the system is agnostic to the specific serving framework, our reference implementation deploys high-throughput vLLM instances. C.3.1. T HE HT T P OP E N AIB A C K E N D ABSTRACTION 

The core component interacting with model servers is the HttpOpenAIBackend class. This class wraps an asynchronous 

httpx.AsyncClient to manage persistent HTTP/1.1 connections to the backend’s /v1/chat/completions end-point. 

Authentication and Configuration. Each backend instance is initialized with a base url v1 and an optional api key .The backend automatically injects the Authorization: Bearer <key> header into every outbound request. The configuration also supports distinct pricing models for input, cached-input, and output tokens, which are normalized into a unified cost proxy during initialization. C.3.2. T ELEMETRY INJECTION VIA FORCED STREAMING 

A critical requirement for the router is to measure Time-To-First-Token (TTFT) latency to train its prediction models, even when the client requests a standard non-streaming JSON response. To achieve this without modifying the standard OpenAI protocol, we implement a side-channel measurement technique within forward chat completions .

Protocol Translation Logic: When the router processes a request, it modifies the payload before forwarding it to the backend: 16 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

1. Forced Streaming: The router explicitly sets stream=True in the request body, regardless of the client’s original preference. 2. Stream Options: It injects stream options= {"include usage": True } to ensure that the backend sends token usage statistics (prompt processing and completion tokens) at the end of the stream. 

Stream Consumption and Measurement: The backend consumes the resulting Server-Sent Events (SSE) stream using an asynchronous iterator. • TTFT Measurement: The router records the monotonic timestamp ( Tstart ) immediately before sending the request. It records a second timestamp ( Tf irst ) upon receiving the first valid SSE data chunk containing a content delta. • Response Reconstruction: Because the client may expect a single JSON object, the router employs a 

StreamReconstruction class. This component aggregates the incoming choices[].delta.content 

fragments into a buffered ChoiceAccum object. • Final Assembly: Once the stream terminates (receiving [DONE] ), the reconstructor builds a standard 

ChatCompletion JSON object, populating the usage field from the final stream chunk. 

Internal Telemetry Transport: To pass the measured TTFT up to the router’s logging and prediction layers without breaking the API contract, the system injects the measurement into the reconstructed JSON payload using a private key, 

iemas t first token monotonic . This key is extracted and removed by the routing pipeline before the final response is returned to the client. C.3.3. R EFERENCE DEPLOYMENT CONFIGURATION 

The system is validated against vLLM backends. The deployment scripts utilize specific flags to enable the advanced memory features relied upon by the router’s prefix cache and cost models. 

vLLM Configuration Flags: As seen in the deployment scripts (e.g., ‘llama.sh‘, ‘qwen.sh‘), the backends are launched with the following critical arguments: • --enable-prefix-caching : This enables the backend’s internal BlockManager to reuse KV-cache pages across requests sharing common prefixes. This is the physical mechanism that the router’s TextPrefixCache attempts to model. • --enable-prompt-tokens-details : This instructs vLLM to return detailed breakdown of token usage, specif-ically the cached tokens field. The router uses this ground-truth signal to validate its prefix cache predictions and detect eviction events. • --max-model-len 4096 : Ensures a consistent context window across heterogeneous models to prevent out-of-memory errors during high-concurrency micro-batching. 17 IEMAS: An Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework for Open Agentic Web Ecosystems 

## D. Pseudo-code of IEMAS 

Algorithm 1 IEMAS: Incentive-Efficiency Routing Framework  

> 1:

Input: Batch of client tasks C, Set of agents S with capacities {Bi} 

> 2:

Global State: Predictive Model M, Agent Prefix Ledgers L = {¯pi,d } 

> 3:

// Phase 1: Cache-Aware Prediction & Valuation  

> 4:

for each task j ∈ C and each agent i ∈ S do  

> 5:

Retrieve last cached prompt ¯pi,d (j) from L 

> 6:

Compute Cache Affinity ωij via Eq. 4  

> 7:

Extract feature vector xij (load, cache, metadata)  

> 8:

Predict QoS: ( ˆLij , ˆPij , ˆCij ) ← M .predict (xij ) 

> 9:

Calculate Client Valuation vj via Eq. 1  

> 10:

Compute Net Welfare weight wij ← vj − ˆCij  

> 11:

if wij < 0 then  

> 12:

Prune edge (i, j ) {Exclude inefficient matches } 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

// Phase 2: Welfare Maximization (MCMF)  

> 16:

Construct bipartite graph G with edge costs −wij  

> 17:

Compute allocation x∗ ← MinCostMaxFlow (G) {Theorem 4.1 } 

> 18:

Calculate Total Welfare W (C) 

> 19:

// Phase 3: VCG Payment & Dispatch  

> 20:

for each task j matched to agent i in x∗ do  

> 21:

// Calculate Opportunity Cost (Externality)  

> 22:

Re-solve MCMF for G \ { j} to get W (C \ { j}) 

> 23:

Compute Payment pj via Eq. 8  

> 24:

Dispatch task j to agent i 

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

// Phase 4: Execution & Online Learning  

> 27:

for each completed task j by agent i do  

> 28:

Observe realized metrics Lobs  

> ij

, C obs  

> ij

, P obs  

> ij
> 29:

M.update (xij , labels ) {Hoeffding Tree Regressor Update } 

> 30:

L.update (i, d (j), new prompt ) {Update Prefix Ledger } 

> 31:

end for 

18