Title: M$^3$-ACE: Rectifying Visual Perception in Multimodal Math Reasoning via Multi-Agentic Context Engineering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08369v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:18:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# M3-ACE: Rectifying Visual Perception in Multimodal Math Reasoning via Multi-Agentic Context Engineering 

Peijin Xie ∗

ITNLP Lab Harbin Institute of Technology 

xpj@stu.hit.edu.cn 

Zhen Xu ∗

Platform and Content Group Tencent 

zenxu@tencent.com 

Bingquan Liu †

ITNLP Lab Harbin Institute of Technology 

bqliu@hit.edu.cn 

Baoxun Wang †

Platform and Content Group Tencent 

asulewang@tencent.com 

Abstract 

Multimodal large language models have recently shown promising progress in visual mathematical reasoning. However, their performance is often limited by a critical yet underexplored bottleneck: inaccurate visual perception. Through systematic analysis, we find that the most failures originate from incorrect or in-complete visual evidence extraction rather than deficiencies in reasoning capability. Moreover, models tend to remain overly confident in their initial perceptions, mak-ing standard strategies such as prompt engineering, multi-round self-reflection, or posterior guidance insufficient to reliably correct errors. To address this limitation, we propose M3-ACE , a multi-agentic context engineer-ing framework designed to rectify visual perception in multimodal math reasoning. Instead of directly aggregating final answers, our approach decouples perception and reasoning by dynamically maintaining a shared context centered on visual evidence lists. Multiple agents collaboratively contribute complementary observa-tions, enabling the system to expose inconsistencies and recover missing perceptual information. To support stable multi-turn collaboration, we further introduce two lightweight tools: a Summary Tool that organizes evidence from different agents into consistent, complementary, and conflicting components, and a Refine Tool that filters unreliable samples and guides iterative correction. Extensive experiments demonstrate that M 3-ACE substantially improves visual mathematical reasoning performance across multiple benchmarks. Our method establishes new state-of-the-art results 89.1 on the MathVision benchmark and achieves consistent improvements on other related datasets, including MathVista 

and MathVerse . These results highlight the importance of perception-centric multi-agent collaboration for advancing multimodal reasoning systems. 

1 Introduction 

Visual mathematical reasoning has emerged as a critical benchmark for evaluating the integrated capabilities of modern vision-language models (VLMs), for example, requiring accurate visual 

> ∗

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. Submitted to 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Do not distribute. 

> arXiv:2603.08369v1 [cs.AI] 9 Mar 2026

perception[Sun et al., 2026], symbolic abstraction[Xu and Forbus, 2025], and multi-step logical reasoning[Liu et al., 2025a]. Recent advances in large-scale multimodal models have significantly improved reasoning performance on visual math tasks, particularly under chain-of-thought[Jia et al., 2025] or tool-augmented prompting paradigms[Yin et al., 2025]. However, despite these gains, model performance remains fragile when confronted with subtle perceptual ambiguities, noisy visual evidence[Zhang et al., 2025a], or complex diagrammatic representations[ ?Li et al., 2025b]. In parallel, context engineering has recently gained attention as an alternative to parameter-level optimization [Chen et al., 2025], demonstrating that carefully structured prompts [Xu et al., 2025a], intermediate representations [Liu et al., 2025b], and interaction protocols [Lin et al., 2025] can substantially enhance model performance without additional training. This paradigm shift suggests that failures in visual reasoning may not solely originate from insufficient reasoning capacity, but rather from how perceptual information is extracted, structured [Chung et al., 2025, Wu et al., 2026], and fed into the reasoning process [Yang et al., 2025b]. We will analyze the function in two parts, based on the definition of the absolute                                                                                                                       

> value of 𝑥 , which is:
> ∣𝑥 ∣=𝑥 if 𝑥 ≥0,𝑦 =sqrt 1−x!
> ∣𝑥 ∣=−𝑥 if 𝑥 <0,𝑦 =sqrt {|(1+x)!|}=|1+x|
> Analyze the function to be Curved for 𝒙 ≥𝟎 and Straight for 𝒙 <𝟎 .
> Now let's examine the options:
> A) Incorrect. This graph has a large semicircle and curves for 𝒙 >𝟏 and 𝒙 <−𝟏 .
> B) Incorrect. This graph is curved for −𝟏 <𝒙 <𝟎 and straight for −𝟏 <𝒙 .
> C) Incorrect. This graph is made of straight lines , but it stops at the x -axis for 𝑥 <
> −1and 𝑥 >1. The function 𝑦 =∣1+𝑥 ∣should continue to increase for 𝑥 <−1.
> D) Incorrect. This graph is straight for 𝒙 >𝟎 . Our analysis led to the curved lines
> of 𝑦 =sqrt 1−x!.
> E) Correct. This graph perfectly matches our combined function. It shows the V-
> shape of 𝒚 =∣𝟏 +𝒙 ∣for 𝒙 <𝟎 and the V -shape of 𝒚 =∣𝟏 −𝒙 ∣for 𝒙 ≥𝟎 . The
> combination of these pieces forms the exact "W" shape shown.
> Therefore, the correct graph is (E) .
> Which is the graph of the function $y= \sqrt{|(1+x)(1 -|x|)|}$?
> Two Conditions
> And Analysis
> Option A
> Description
> Option B
> Description
> Option C
> Description
> Option D
> Description
> Option E
> Description
> Question

Final 

Answer 

Figure 1: Visual Evidence as the Bottleneck — Decoupling Perception and Reasoning. In this work, we revisit visual mathematical reasoning from the perspective of Visual Evidence (VE), i.e., the structured perceptual facts extracted from images that serve as the foundation for downstream reasoning. We argue that reasoning and perception should be explicitly decoupled: while reasoning traces generated by state-of-the-art (SOTA) models are often logically sound, failures frequently arise from incorrect or incomplete visual evidence. Empirically, perception has become the dominant bottleneck in solving visual math problems [Endo et al., 2026, Chen et al., 2026, Wang et al., 2025a]. Prior open-source approaches largely relied on reinforcement learning or task-specific fine-tuning to mitigate this issue [Xu et al., 2025b, Zhang et al., 2026]. In contrast, under the era of powerful SOTA foundation models, we demonstrate that context engineering alone—without additional training —can effectively address perception errors by restructuring how visual evidence is elicited, verified, and refined. This distinguishes our approach from prior works that focus on improving reasoning ability through model updates rather than improving perceptual reliability through interaction design [Maxim AI, 2025, Zhang et al., 2025c] We first conduct a systematic empirical study to verify that visual evidence extraction is indeed the primary source of errors in state-of-the-art visual mathematical reasoning models. By decoupling the reasoning process into visual evidence extraction, trajectory planning, and final reasoning using Gemini-2.5 Pro and GPT-5, we perform a detailed bad-case analysis alongside a two-round mutual correction experiment. Our findings reveal a strong correlation between answer correctness and VE correctness. Specifically: (1) For all incorrect answers, the error can be traced back to incorrect visual evidence, while the corresponding reasoning traces remain logically valid. (2) For correct answers, both the extracted visual evidence and reasoning traces are consistently correct. 2Furthermore, we observe a striking asymmetry: providing the model with corrected visual evidence can successfully rectify wrong answers, whereas supplying the correct final answer does not enable the model to recover the correct visual evidence. These results indicate that models fundamentally struggle with visual evidence correction, and that correct VE is a necessary precondition for correct answers, rather than a byproduct of successful reasoning. We further investigate whether a single model can autonomously correct its visual evidence errors within an isolated single-model setting. On the same benchmark, we explore several commonly adopted self-correction strategies, including: (1) prompt engineering in a single-round question-answering setup; (2) multi-round self-reflection with reflection on the final answer; (3) multi-round interactions with explicit reflection on visual evidence; (4) explicitly informing the model that its visual evidence is incorrect and asking for revision. Across all settings, we find that single-model self-correction yields only marginal improvements and fails to reliably fix VE errors. Notably, prompt engineering and multi-round self-reflection without external guidance may even destabilize correct predictions. These results suggest that once incorrect visual evidence is formed, the model exhibits strong confirmation bias and lacks the capability to effectively re-perceive the image, even when guided by reflective prompts. These findings motivate approaches beyond isolated single-model reflection. Motivated by these observations, we propose M3-Agent, a multi-agent framework designed to progres-sively address the visual evidence bottleneck. Our system is built upon three core design principles: (i) Decoupling Principle , which explicitly separates the visual evidence list from the final answer to directly target the bottleneck; (ii) Complementary Information Principle , which introduces heterogeneous assistant agents to provide diverse and potentially conflicting visual evidence, thereby reducing confirmation bias in self-reflection; and (iii) Filtering Principle , which selectively focuses refinement efforts on difficult or highly disputed samples while filtering out easy or high-consensus cases early. Instead of relying on a single model’s self-reflection, our approach introduces structured multi-agent interactions over a shared visual evidence context, enabling cross-validation through consistent, complementary, and conflicting evidence categorization, disagreement resolution via lightweight summary and refinement tools, and iterative refinement of perceptual facts until convergence. Our main contributions are threefold: 1. We identify and empirically validate visual evidence extraction as the primary bottleneck in state-of-the-art visual mathematical reasoning models, showing that errors primarily originate from incorrect visual evidence rather than flawed reasoning. 2. We demonstrate that single-model self-correction is insufficient for resolving VE er-rors—prompt engineering and multi-round self-reflection without external guidance fail to improve visual evidence accuracy and may destabilize correct predictions. 3. We propose M3-Agent, a novel multi-agent context engineering framework that signifi-cantly improves visual evidence accuracy through structured cross-validation and iterative refinement, consequently enhancing final answer correctness without additional model training. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Visual Math Reasoning 

The evaluation of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) in visual mathematical reasoning has been significantly advanced by three pivotal benchmarks [Xue et al., 2025, Wu et al., 2025] that collec-tively address different dimensions of the problem. MathVista [Lu et al., 2024] serves as the first comprehensive foundation benchmark, integrating 28 existing datasets with three newly developed subsets (IQTest, FunctionQA, and PaperQA) to provide 6,141 samples spanning seven distinct rea-soning types including algebraic, geometric, and statistical reasoning. Building upon this foundation, MathVerse [Zhang et al., 2024] introduces an innovative “Visual Ablation” design that transforms 2,612 original problems into over 15,000 test samples across six versions ranging from text-dominant to vision-only configurations, enabling precise diagnosis of whether models genuinely utilize visual information or merely rely on textual redundancy [Yang et al., 2025a, Lv et al., 2025]. Representing 3the upper bound of difficulty, MathVision [Wang et al., 2024] focuses on competition-level challenges by sourcing 3,040 high-quality problems from prestigious mathematics competitions such as AMC and AIME, covering 16 mathematical disciplines across five difficulty levels [Xu et al., 2025c]. Recent models have demonstrated remarkable progress on these benchmarks: the Qwen3.5 series achieves 85.7% on MathVista and 78.9% on MathVision, substantially surpassing human baselines of 60.3% and 68.82% respectively. However, several critical challenges persist [Li et al., 2025a, Zhu et al., 2025]. First, the significant performance gap between MathVista (85.7%) and MathVerse (63.5%) for the same model reveals “modality laziness” [Yan et al., 2025b], where models tend to rely heavily on textual cues while insufficiently leveraging visual information. Second, current models struggle with fine-grained visual perception [Yan et al., 2025a, Wang et al., 2025b,c], particularly in parsing geometric diagrams with precise spatial relationships and symbolic annotations [Ma et al., 2025, Jiang et al., 2025]. Third, the substantial gap on competition-level problems (GPT-4o achieving only 30.39% on MathVision) underscores difficulties in orchestrating complex multi-step reasoning chains [Li et al., 2025c, Plaat et al., 2025, Thawakar et al., 2025] that integrate visual understanding with mathematical formalization [Su et al., 2025, Zhan et al., 2025]. These observations suggest that despite high accuracy on general benchmarks, true multimodal mathematical reasoning remains an open challenge [Zhou et al., 2025a, Qian et al., 2025]. 

2.2 Context Engineering 

Agentic Context Engineering (ACE) has emerged as a paradigm shift in adapting Large Language Models (LLMs) to complex tasks [Yao et al., 2025]. Popularized by Karpathy [Karpathy, 2025], context engineering treats the LLM as a processor while its context window functions as working memory [LangChain, 2025], systematically managing information through Write , Select , Compress ,and Isolate operations [Anthropic, 2025a]. The evolution of prompting techniques has progressed from Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [Wei et al., 2022] to ReAct [Yao et al., 2023] and Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2023], with frameworks such as LangChain [LangChain, 2025], AutoGPT [Team, 2025], and the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [Anthropic, 2025b] operationalizing these principles [Xu et al., 2025d, Ao et al., 2025]. Compared to post-training methods such as Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), ACE offers compelling advantages [Bohnet et al., 2025, Firoozi et al., 2025]: (1) efficiency —no weight updates required; (2) flexibility —new knowledge can be injected immediately through context modification; (3) interpretability —each decision step can be traced through explicit context inspection; and (4) controllability —modifications take effect instantly without catastrophic forgetting [Kawaharazuka et al., 2025, Khan and Waheed, 2025]. Nevertheless, SFT and parameter-efficient methods like LoRA may outperform pure in-context learning on specific planning tasks [Bohnet et al., 2025]. Despite rapid progress, multimodal ACE remains nascent with significant research gaps [Zhang et al., 2025b, Sui et al., 2025]. Key challenges include: (1) cross-modal alignment —efficiently integrating heterogeneous data streams while maintaining spatiotemporal coherence [Oliveira et al., 2025]; (2) physics constraint gap —VLMs often fail to generate execution strategies respecting physical dynamics [Poria et al., 2025, Zhou et al., 2025b, Guo et al., 2025]; (3) evaluation benchmarks —existing text-centric metrics inadequately capture multimodal decision rationality [Elnoor et al., 2025]; and (4) inference cost —multimodal tokens consume substantial computational resources, making adaptive token pruning an active research frontier. 

3 Diagnosing the Visual Evidence Bottleneck 

In this section, we analyze failure modes of state-of-the-art visual mathematical reasoning models and examine whether they can be resolved within a single-model setting. As shown in Figure 2, by decoupling the process into visual evidence extraction, trajectory planning, and final answer using Gemini-2.5 Pro and GPT-5, we show that errors primarily originate from incorrect visual evidence rather than flawed reasoning. Then, self-correction experiments reveal that models struggle to recover correct visual evidence—even when given the correct answer—while supplying corrected visual evidence reliably fixes wrong answers. Moreover, prompt engineering and multi-round self-reflection without external guidance fail to improve visual evidence accuracy and may destabilize 4Wrong  VE  

> Wrong Answer

Prompt Engineering on Visual 

Evidence 

Add  2nd  Reflector on Whole 

Reasoning Process 

Self -Correction under Idealized Supervision  only  on  Failed  Samples 

> Math Question

Add  2nd  Reflector on VE 

Extraction Process              

> Math Question
> The Previous Response is
> wrong ，please re -answer the
> problem …
> 2nd VE
> 2nd Answer
> Wrong VE
> Wrong Answer
> Math Question
> Math Question
> 2nd VE
> Wrong VE
> Wrong Answer
> Math Question
> Math Question

2nd  Answer                                  

> The Previous Response is wrong 。
> The correct answer is 「xxx 」，
> please re -answer and correct the
> visual evidence …
> The Previous Response is wrong.
> The correct Visual Evidence is
> 「xxx, xxx, xxx 」， please re -
> answer and correct the answer …
> … Focus on the Perception
> Visual Evidence …

Prompt Engineering on Visual 

Evidence 

Add  2nd  Reflector on Whole 

Reasoning Process 

3 Attempts  on  Single  Agent  to  Fix Perception Failure  on  All  Data 

> Math Question

VE 

Answer   

> Math Question
> Math Question
> … REFLECT on the Whole Previous
> Reasoning Process …

Add  2nd  Reflector on VE 

Extraction Process   

> Math Question
> Math Question
> … REFLECT on the Visual Evidence
> Extraction Process …

Acc  = 30.2%  Acc  = 26.1%  Acc  = 91.7%  

> Math Question
> Please solve the problem step
> by step and put your answer
> in one boxed{}
> Math Question
> Solve the Problem in 3 steps:
> Step 1: Visual Evidence Extraction.
> Step 2: Problem Understanding and
> Solution Plan.
> Step 3: derive the final answer
> VE List Solution
> plan
> Answer
> boxed{ answer }
> boxed{ answer }
> [evidence 1,
> evidence 2,
> evidence 3,
> …,]
> {step 1: xxx…,
> step 2: xxx…,
> step 3: xxx…,
> …,}
> step 1: xxx…,
> step 2: xxx…,
> step 3: xxx…,
> …

Decoupling Trajectory and Visual Evidence 

> Step 2 Step 1
> Step 3

VE 

Answer 

2nd  VE 

2nd  Answer 

2nd  VE 

2nd  Answer  2nd  VE 

2nd  Answer Figure 2: Diagnosing the Visual Evidence Bottleneck. correct predictions. These findings identify visual evidence extraction as the dominant bottleneck and motivate approaches beyond isolated single-model reflection. 

3.1 Decoupling Trajectory and Visual Evidence 

In this section, we explicitly decouple the model’s problem-solving process into visual perception and reasoning, and analyze their respective contributions to final answer correctness. As shown in the top blue part of Figure 2, given a visual math problem, the model is required to proceed in three steps: (1) extract visual evidence (VE) that is relevant to solving the problem; (2) plan a reasoning trajectory, describing the logical steps needed to reach a solution; and (3) instantiate the planned trajectory by grounding it in the extracted visual evidence to derive the final answer. This decomposition allows us to independently evaluate perception and reasoning, and to examine where failures primarily occur. Across both Gemini-2.5 Pro and GPT-5, we observe highly consistent performance trends. As shown in Table 1, while the two models achieve comparable overall results, a clear accuracy hierarchy emerges: trajectory accuracy is the highest (close to 90%), followed by answer accuracy (around 70%), and finally visual evidence accuracy (around 60%). When focusing on correctly answered 5Table 1: Decoupling Trajectory and Visual Evidence. Gemini 25 pro GPT-5 All 304 Samples SP steps VE list SP steps VE list Total 208 (68.4%) 210 (69.1%) 

✓ 205 (98.6%) 170 (81.7%) 201 (95.7%) 170 (80.9%) Success 

✘ 3 (1.4%) 38 (18.3%) 9 (4.3%) 40 (19.1%) Total 96 (31.6%) 94 (30.9%) 

✓ 67 (69.8%) 12 (12.5%) 62 (66.0%) 16 (17.0%) Failed 

✗ 29 (30.2%) 84 (87.5%) 32 (34.0%) 78 (83.0%) Success Total 272 (89.5%) 182 (59.8%) 272 (89.5%) 182 (59.8%) Table 2: Self-Correction under Idealized Supervision Add Info Gemini 2.5 pro GPT 5 VE Answer VE Answer GT judge 22/96 29/96 25/94 31/94 GT judge + GT answer 22/84 - 22/78 -GT VE - 88/96 - 89/94 cases, trajectory accuracy exceeds 95% and VE accuracy remains above 80%. In contrast, for incorrectly answered cases, trajectory accuracy remains relatively high (above 67%), whereas VE accuracy drops sharply to approximately 12%. These statistics indicate that reasoning plans are often correct even when final answers fail, and that perception errors dominate failure cases. These findings lead to several important conclusions. First, a model’s solution process can be naturally decomposed—much like human problem solving—into perceived visual facts and abstract reasoning steps. Second, upon receiving a problem, current SOTA models already possess a strong ability to derive correct reasoning trajectories, achieving over 90% accuracy in planning solution steps. Third, models significantly struggle with accurate visual evidence perception, and incorrect answers are overwhelmingly associated with severely degraded VE accuracy. Consequently, correcting failure cases fundamentally requires improving visual evidence accuracy; without reliable perception, even strong reasoning capabilities cannot yield correct answers. 

3.2 Self-Correction under Idealized Supervision 

In this subsection, we evaluate the feasibility of model self-correction under idealized conditions. Experiments are conducted on the error subset of the mini benchmark, where models fail in the first round. To simulate external supervision, we retain the full first-round interaction history and require the model to re-answer with additional information provided in the prompt. As shown in the middle green part of Figure 2, we consider three progressively stronger forms of supervision: (1) providing ground-truth judgment, explicitly informing the model that its previous answer was incorrect; (2) in cases where visual evidence is incorrect, providing both ground-truth judgment and the correct final answer, and asking the model to revise its visual evidence; and (3) directly providing corrected visual evidence, while requiring the model to re-answer the question. As shown in Table 2, our results reveal clear limitations in the model’s ability to self-correct. Under the most basic supervision—explicitly stating that the previous answer is wrong—the model achieves only around 30% second-round accuracy, which serves as an approximate upper bound for self-reflection-based correction. When additionally providing the correct final answer, the model’s ability to retrospectively correct its visual evidence remains limited, with VE correction rates below 30%. In contrast, when erroneous visual evidence is minimally corrected and fed back to the model, answer accuracy improves dramatically, reaching 88.5% and 84.6%, respectively. Notably, even after being informed of its mistake, the model frequently persists in its original answer, exhibiting a form of overconfidence or rigidity; we provide a more detailed analysis of this behavior in the appendix. These findings lead to three key conclusions. First, current models possess a limited but non-negligible capacity for second-round reflection, achieving up to 30% correction accuracy when explicitly told they are wrong. Second, the primary difficulty lies in visual evidence perception: models lack the 6Table 3: Limits of Single-Model Prompting and Reflection Reflect Mode Gemini2.5 pro GPT 5 VE Answer VE Answer Orignal 182 208 186 210 1st turn prompt engineering 181 −1 212 +4 190 +4 207 −3

2nd turn reflect on answer 189 +7 204 −4 169 −17 202 −8

2nd turn reflect on VE 174 −8 200 −8 180 −6 210 +0 

ability to effectively backtrack and reconstruct correct visual evidence, even when the correct answer is provided. Third, extracting complete and accurate visual evidence is the true bottleneck—while ground-truth visual evidence reliably yields correct answers, the inverse does not hold, as correct answers rarely enable the recovery of correct visual evidence. 

3.3 Limits of Single-Model Prompting and Reflection 

In this subsection, we examine whether a single model can independently resolve visual evidence perception errors without any external supervision. Specifically, we explore several commonly adopted prompt-based strategies that aim to improve perception through better instruction or self-reflection. As shown in the bottom orange part of Figure 2, First, we emphasize the importance of visual evidence in the initial prompt, explicitly warning the model that incorrect VE extraction will lead to incorrect answers and instructing it to carefully verify visual evidence before proceeding with reasoning. Second, we introduce a second-round reflection stage where the model is asked to reflect on its entire first-round reasoning process. Third, we further narrow the focus of reflection by explicitly instructing the model to revisit and revise its visual evidence extraction before re-answering. Despite these efforts, we observe no substantial improvement in either obvious visual evidence accuracy or final answer accuracy. As shown in Table 3, emphasizing visual evidence in the prompt—whether in the first round or during second-round reflection—fails to meaningfully improve VE correctness. Moreover, when no new information is introduced, applying second-round reflection across all samples yields minimal gains, regardless of whether the reflection targets the full reasoning process or explicitly focuses on visual evidence. These results suggest that prompt-level emphasis alone is insufficient to overcome perception errors. We conclude that simple prompt adjustments within a single-model setting are inadequate for correct-ing visual perception limitations. Multi-round self-reflection without external posterior guidance does not reliably converge: the model struggles to fix incorrect cases and may even degrade previously correct answers by introducing new errors. As detailed in the appendix, this instability further under-scores the inherent difficulty of perception correction under a single-model paradigm and motivates the need for alternative strategies beyond isolated self-reflection. 

3.4 Summary and Motivation for Multi-Agent Visual Evidence Modeling 

We summarize the above analyses as follows. First, by explicitly decoupling the problem-solving pro-cess into visual evidence extraction, solution trajectory planning, and final reasoning, we demonstrate that failures in visual mathematical reasoning primarily stem from errors in visual evidence perception rather than deficiencies in reasoning ability. While models are generally capable of deriving correct solution trajectories, inaccurate or incomplete visual evidence fundamentally undermines the final answer. Second, we investigate the feasibility of correcting incorrect cases through model self-correction with external posterior supervision. Under idealized conditions—where the model is explicitly informed of its mistake—the correction rate remains limited to around 30%. Moreover, even when provided with the ground-truth final answer, the model exhibits weak capability in retrospectively reconstructing correct visual evidence. In contrast, supplying corrected visual evidence reliably leads to correct answers, establishing that correct visual evidence is a prerequisite for correct answers, while the reverse does not hold. Finally, we remove all external posterior information and evaluate whether a single model can independently resolve visual evidence errors. Our results show that neither emphasizing visual 7Context         

> Book
> Input
> Query
> Generator
> Consistent
> Complement
> Conflicting
> Conflicting
> Ratio
> Reflector
> Final Answer &VE
> Answer Consistency Analysis
> Consistent Inconsistent
> Summary Tool
> Refine Tool
> Conflicting
> Ratio
> Reflect Answer &VE
> Anchor Agent
> Anchor Answer
> Anchor VE Lists
> Step 2: Regenerate with Summary
> Step 1: Context initialization by Multi Agents
> Step 3: Refine by
> Inconsistency & Conflicts

Output 

> Anchor Agent
> Anchor Agent
> Summary
> Tool
> Refine Tool

M3-ACE Pipeline    

> Assistant Answers
> Assistant VE Lists
> Assistant Agents

Figure 3: M 3-ACE Pipeline(right part) with Two Auxiliary Tools(left part). evidence in the prompt nor applying multi-round self-reflection effectively mitigates perception errors. Without explicit external guidance, reflection not only fails to correct incorrect cases but may also destabilize correct ones, causing previously correct answers to degrade. These findings indicate that single-model prompting and self-reflection are insufficient to overcome the inherent limitations of visual perception. To address these challenges and transcend the limitations of a single agent, we propose to introduce 

multiple agents to collaboratively and dynamically maintain the core bottleneck—namely, the visual evidence list. Different agents naturally offer diverse and sometimes conflicting interpretations of visual evidence. Compared to prompt-level emphasis, such inter-agent disagreement provides a more explicit and concrete signal that encourages models to re-examine their own perception. Furthermore, the patterns of agreement and conflict among multiple experts partially emulate reliable posterior supervision, guiding second-round reflection while reducing the risk of degrading correct answers. This motivation directly leads to our core design principles, which propose a multi-agent context engineering framework on visual perceptions. 

4 Method 

In this section, we introduce M3-Agent, a multi-agent framework designed to progressively address the visual evidence bottleneck identified in previous sections. Our system is built upon three core design principles: 1. Decoupling Principle. To directly target the bottleneck, we explicitly separate the visual evidence list from the final answer in the original response. For the anchor agent, both its visual evidence list and answer are treated as the primary components of an iteratively updated context. 2. Complementary Information Principle. To mitigate the anchor agent’s tendency to over-trust its own initial perception, we introduce heterogeneous assistant agents whose responses serve as external information sources. By exposing the anchor agent to diverse and potentially conflicting visual evidence, we encourage reconsideration during refinement and reduce confirmation bias in self-reflection. 3. Filtering Principle. To improve iteration efficiency and reduce redundant token consump-tion, we selectively focus on difficult or highly disputed samples. Easy or high-consensus 8cases are filtered out early, and iterative refinement is applied primarily to samples with substantial disagreement or perceptual inconsistency. 

4.1 M3-ACE Pipeline 

Based on these principles, we design the M 3-ACE pipeline, which consists of three main steps supported by two auxiliary tools. 

Step 1: Multi-Agent Initialization. We first invite the anchor agent and assistant agents to inde-pendently respond to the problem. Each response is explicitly structured into two parts: a visual evidence list and a final answer. These components collectively form a shared context repository for solving the problem. The anchor agent’s context is treated as an iteratively refinable component, while assistant agents’ contexts are frozen as external reference signals and are not updated in later iterations. 

Step 2: Context Summarization and Regeneration. Next, we invoke a summary tool to aggregate and categorize the visual evidence lists from multiple agents into three groups: consistent, com-plementary, and conflicting. Based on this summarized context, the anchor agent regenerates an updated visual evidence list and corresponding answer. This step enables structured incorporation of inter-agent agreement and disagreement into the refinement process. 

Step 3: Refinement and Filtering. We then apply a refine tool to analyze (i) the consistency between the new and previous answers and (ii) the proportion of inconsistent visual evidence within the updated context. Samples whose new answers diverge significantly from prior consensus and contain a high ratio of conflicting visual evidence are rejected and sent back to Step 2 for further refinement. The remaining samples are selected as finalized predictions. The full pipeline is detailed in Algorithm 1. The refinement loop (Steps 2–3) continues until the ratio of selected samples reaches the predefined threshold, at which point the algorithm terminates. 

4.2 Two Auxiliary Tools 

To support the dynamic maintenance of the multi-agent context, we introduce two external auxiliary modules: a Summary Tool and a Refine Tool. Both tools are driven by lightweight agents and combined with explicitly designed hard logical rules to ensure stable summarization and filtering. Unlike the main anchor agent, these tools are not responsible for solving the task directly; instead, they structure and regulate the iterative refinement process. 

Summary Tool. The Summary Tool is responsible for aggregating and structuring visual evidence across agents. It takes as input the current anchor agent context and the frozen assistant agent contexts. Specifically, given the visual evidence list from the anchor agent, the tool compares each item against the visual evidence lists provided by assistant agents. Based on this comparison, visual evidence items are categorized into three groups relative to the anchor agent: 1. Consistent VE: Evidence supported by one or more assistant agents. 2. Complementary VE: Evidence provided by assistant agents but absent from the anchor agent’s list. 3. Conflicting VE: Evidence that contradicts the anchor agent’s extracted visual facts. In addition to this tripartite classification, the tool computes a conflict ratio, defined as the proportion of conflicting visual evidence items relative to the total number of visual evidence items in the anchor context. The Summary Tool outputs the three categorized VE groups along with the conflict ratio, which serves as a quantitative signal of perceptual instability for downstream refinement. 

Refine Tool. The Refine Tool determines whether a problem instance should be accepted or further iterated. It operates in two stages. First, a lightweight agent evaluates answer consistency between the anchor agent and assistant agents. If the number of assistant answers agreeing with the anchor answer is greater than or equal to half of the total number of assistant agents, the response is considered high-consensus. Second, this answer consistency signal is combined with the previously computed conflict ratio. If a sample exhibits both (i) a high conflict ratio (greater than 0.2) and (ii) is not classified as high-9Algorithm 1 M3-ACE: Multi-Agent Context Engineering 

Require: Problem set P = {(Qj , I j )}Mj=1 ; Anchor agent A0; Assistant agents {A1, . . . , A n};Selection ratio threshold τ

Ensure: Final answers {ˆyj }

1: // Step 1: Multi-Agent Initialization 

2: for each problem (Qj , I j ) ∈ P do 

3: for each agent Ai ∈ { A0, A 1, ..., A n} do 

4: (V E (0)  

> i,j

, y (0)  

> i,j

) ← Ai(Qj , I j )

5: end for 

6: Freeze assistant context {(V E (0)  

> i,j

, y (0)  

> i,j

)}ni=1 

7: Initialize anchor context C(0)  

> j

← (V E (0) 0,j , y (0) 0,j )

8: end for 

9: U ← P // Unresolved problems 

10: S ← ∅ // Selected problems 

11: k ← 0

12: repeat 

13: for each problem j ∈ U do 

14: // Step 2: Context Summarization 

15: (V E cons , V E comp , V E conf ) ← SUMMARY TOOL (C(k) 

> j

, {V E (0)  

> i,j

}ni=1 )

16: (V E (k+1) 0,j , y (k+1) 0,j ) ← A0(Qj , I j | V E cons , V E comp , V E conf )

17: // Step 3: Refinement and Filtering 

18: decision ← REFINE TOOL (y(k+1) 0,j , {y(0)  

> i,j

}ni=1 , V E (k+1) 0,j )

19: if decision == Select then 

20: S ← S ∪ { j}

21: ˆyj ← y(k+1) 0,j 

22: else 

23: Keep j in U for next iteration 

24: end if 

25: end for 

26: U ← P \ S 

27: k ← k + 1 

28: until |S| /|P| ≥ τ

29: return {ˆyj }j∈S 

consensus, it is rejected and returned to the next iteration for further refinement. All remaining samples are selected and retained as finalized outputs. Through this combination of lightweight semantic analysis and hard logical filtering, the Summary and Refine tools jointly enable stable and efficient iterative context maintenance, preventing unnecessary re-computation on easy samples while focusing refinement efforts on perceptually ambiguous and disputed cases. 

5 Main Result 

5.1 Results on the MathVision Benchmark 

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of M3-Agent on the MathVision benchmark. Our experiments aim to verify two key design motivations: (1) introducing external information from multiple agents, and (2) decoupling visual evidence (VE) from answers to enable iterative context engineering. 

Experimental Setup. We construct two groups of agent ensembles with different capability levels: a SOTA ensemble and a sub-SOTA ensemble . The SOTA ensemble consists of four state-of-the-art multimodal large language models: Gemini-3 Pro, Gemini-2.5 Pro, GPT-5, and Claude-4.5 Sonnet. Among them, Gemini-3 Pro achieves the best single-model performance on MathVision (over 80% 10 accuracy), while Claude-4.5 Sonnet performs the worst (around 60%). To form the sub-SOTA ensemble, we remove both Gemini-3 Pro and Claude-4.5 Sonnet, retaining the remaining models. During inference, we alternately designate each model in the ensemble as the anchor agent , while the remaining models serve as assistant agents . The full results are reported in Table 4 and Table 5. 

Impact of Multi-Agent Information. Introducing external viewpoints from multiple agents con-sistently improves performance. As shown in the 1st Regenerate column of Table 4 and Table 5, all anchor models achieve higher accuracy compared with their direct single-agent inference results. Within the SOTA ensemble, Gemini-3 Pro improves by 3.1 points, Gemini-2.5 Pro by 7.2 points, GPT-5 by 9.3 points, and Claude-4.5 Sonnet by 14.8 points. Similar improvements are observed in the sub-SOTA ensemble for Gemini-2.5 Pro, GPT-5, and Claude-4.5 Sonnet. These results indicate that incorporating perspectives from other agents provides valuable complemen-tary information for solving visual math problems. For relatively weaker models (e.g., Claude-4.5 Sonnet), the inclusion of stronger agents introduces correct evidence that helps correct perceptual errors, resulting in large accuracy gains. Meanwhile, stronger models (e.g., Gemini-3 Pro in the SOTA ensemble and Gemini-2.5 Pro in the sub-SOTA ensemble) are not negatively affected by weaker agents. Instead, they selectively absorb useful information while ignoring incorrect evidence, achieving additional performance improvements. Overall, the consistent gains demonstrate the effectiveness of the multi-agent design in M3-Agent. 

Benefits of Multi-Round Reflection. Beyond the multi-agent setup, iterative reasoning further improves performance. During the refine stage, the refine tool selects answers based on both VE lists and answer consistency across agents. As shown in the 1st Refine column of Table 4, the selected subset achieves an accuracy close to 90%, which is approximately three points higher than the overall average accuracy. In contrast, rejected samples have an accuracy more than 30 points lower than the average. This indicates that the refine stage effectively filters out a small number of low-quality predictions. Importantly, only about one-tenth of the samples enter the iterative correction process, which signifi-cantly improves computational efficiency for the entire pipeline. During the subsequent reflect stage, agents iteratively revise their predictions on these difficult samples. Substantial improvements are observed: Gemini-3 Pro improves by 10.8 points, Gemini-2.5 Pro by 9.4 points, GPT-5 by 8.5 points, and Claude-4.5 Sonnet by 1.0 point. These results show that the refine–reflect mechanism effectively resolves hard cases through targeted multi-round reasoning. 

Performance Gains Across Model Capability Levels. An interesting pattern emerges when comparing models with different capability levels. Stronger models benefit less from multi-agent information but gain more from multi-round reflection, while weaker models show the opposite trend. For example, in the 1st Regenerate stage, Gemini-3 Pro gains only 3.1 points, which is much smaller than the 14.8-point improvement achieved by Claude-4.5 Sonnet. However, during the reflection stage, Gemini-3 Pro improves by 10.5 points, significantly larger than the 1.0-point gain of Claude-4.5 Sonnet. This observation aligns with intuitive expectations. For high-capability agents, external opinions from weaker models have limited influence, but they possess strong self-correction ability when explicitly prompted to reconsider their reasoning. Conversely, weaker models benefit greatly from correct external evidence provided by stronger agents, but often lack the perceptual capability required for effective self-correction. These findings suggest that strong agents excel at understanding and correcting perceptual details, while weaker agents rely more heavily on external guidance. The combined refine–reflect design of M3-ACE effectively leverages both mechanisms, allowing the framework to accommodate agents of different capability levels and demonstrating strong generalization ability. 11 Table 4: Results of the SOTA Ensemble. Subscripts without uparrows( ↑) denote the number of samples. The green numbers indicate the number of samples filtered as Select, while the red numbers indicate the number of samples filtered as Reject. The selected samples are merged into the final answer pool, whereas the rejected samples are regenerated and proceed to the next round. Subscripts with arrows represent the accuracy (ACC) improvement compared to the previous stage. The gray arrow subscripts indicate the ACC gain of the first-round “Regenerate with Summary” compared to CoT inference. The blue arrow subscripts denote the ACC improvement obtained after the 1st Reflect step on the rejected samples, relative to the answers from the first-round “Regenerate with Summary.” The purple arrow subscripts represent the overall ACC improvement on the entire dataset, from the first-round “Regenerate with Summary” to after the 1st Reflect stage. Anchor Agent CoT Infer 1st Regenerate with Summary 1st Refine 1st Reflect Select Reject Reject All Gemini 3 pro 85.0 88.1 3.1 ↑ 92.7 2741 46.1 299 56.9 10.8 ↑ 89.1 1.0 ↑

Gemini 2.5 pro 73.3 80.5 7.2 ↑ 84.4 2812 32.2 228 41.6 9.4 ↑ 81.2 0.7 ↑

GPT 5 72.0 81.3 9.3 ↑ 85.5 2709 47.1 331 55.6 8.5 ↑ 82.2 0.9 ↑

Claude-45 61.2 76.0 14.8 ↑ 79.2 2250 66.7 790 68.7 1.0 ↑ 76.5 0.5 ↑

Table 5: Results of the sub-SOTA Ensemble. Anchor Agent CoT Infer 1st Regenerate with Summary Gemini 2.5 pro 73.3 77.6 GPT 5 72.0 78.5 Claude-45 61.2 71.2 

5.2 Results on Other Math Vision Benchmarks 

We further evaluate M 3-ACE on additional visual mathematical reasoning benchmarks, including MathVista and MathVerse. Across these datasets, the proposed framework consistently achieves notable performance improvements over single-model inference. These results demonstrate that the benefits of multi-agent context engineering and VE–answer decoupling generalize beyond the MathVision benchmark. Detailed experimental results are provided in the Appendix. 

6 Ablation Studies 

In this section, we present additional ablation studies to further validate our previous findings and provide deeper analysis of the proposed framework. In particular, we investigate the following questions: (1) whether the improvement is indeed related to the correction of visual perception errors; (2) whether the key bottleneck lies in visual evidence rather than the final answer aggregation; (3) how weaker agents influence stronger agents when introduced into the multi-agent framework; and (4) the stability and convergence behavior of the reflection iterations. 

Q1: Does performance improvement correlate with corrected visual perception? To verify whether the observed gains stem from improved visual perception, we perform additional sampling-based evaluation on the generated VE lists. The results show that accuracy improvements strongly correlate with corrected visual evidence, confirming our earlier hypothesis that perception errors constitute the primary bottleneck. More detailed analysis is provided in the Appendix. 

Q2: Context engineering on VE vs. answer-level multi-agent aggregation. We further compare our approach with alternative strategies that directly aggregate final answers across multiple agents and rounds. The results show that maintaining the intermediate perception process—specifically the VE list—as the shared context leads to significantly better performance than simply aggregating answers. Although this design introduces a slightly more complex pipeline, it directly targets the core bottleneck and yields more reliable improvements. Detailed results are reported in the Appendix. 12 Q3: Influence of weaker agents on stronger agents. We conduct additional experiments by grouping agents according to their standalone reasoning performance and evaluating combinations of stronger and weaker models. Under the guidance of the proposed summary tool, stronger agents consistently benefit from complementary observations provided by both peer-level and weaker agents. From a posterior analysis perspective, we further visualize the upset patterns among agent predictions, providing insight into the phenomenon where weaker agents occasionally supply crucial missing evidence that helps stronger agents correct perception errors. Further details are included in the Appendix. 

Q4: Stability of the reflection process. Finally, we analyze the stability and convergence of the reflection iterations under different anchor agents and refine conditions. The experiments reveal that the refine tool plays a critical role in stabilizing the reflection process by filtering unreliable cases and preventing degeneration during iterative reasoning. Additional experimental results and analysis are provided in the Appendix. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we systematically investigate the failure modes of state-of-the-art multimodal large language models in visual mathematical reasoning. Through a series of controlled analyses, we identify that the primary bottleneck does not lie in the reasoning capability itself, but rather in the perception stage—specifically in the extraction of accurate visual evidence from images. Our experiments show that models are generally capable of producing correct reasoning trajectories when the necessary information is available, yet they frequently fail to perceive or correctly describe key visual facts. Moreover, models tend to remain overly confident in these incorrect perceptions, making it difficult for conventional approaches such as prompt refinement, multi-round self-reflection, or external posterior guidance to reliably correct the errors. This combination of perception errors and persistent incorrect beliefs forms the core obstacle preventing further improvements in visual math reasoning. To address this limitation, we propose M3-ACE , a multi-agent, multi-turn multimodal context en-gineering framework designed to explicitly target the perception bottleneck. Instead of directly aggregating final answers, our approach decouples the reasoning process by focusing on the main-tenance and refinement of a shared visual evidence list . Multiple agents with diverse perception capabilities collaboratively contribute observations, allowing complementary information to emerge while exposing potential conflicts in visual interpretation. The system dynamically maintains a context book centered on these visual evidence lists, which serve as the foundation for subsequent reasoning and answer generation. To ensure efficient coordination and stable convergence across agents and iterations, we further introduce two lightweight auxiliary tools: a Summary Tool , which aggregates and categorizes visual evidence from multiple agents into consistent, complementary, and conflicting components, and a Refine Tool , which selectively filters unreliable samples and guides the iterative reflection process. Extensive experiments across multiple visual mathematical reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly improves performance compared with single-agent inference and naive multi-agent aggregation strategies. The results show that incorporating diverse perceptual perspectives effectively corrects missing or incorrect visual evidence, while the iterative refinement process stabilizes multi-round reasoning and prevents degeneration during reflection. Notably, even strong models can benefit from complementary observations provided by weaker agents, highlighting the importance of diverse perception in multimodal reasoning systems. Overall, our findings suggest that improving visual perception and its integration into reasoning pipelines is crucial for advancing multimodal mathematical reasoning. By shifting the focus from answer-level aggregation to perception-level context engineering, M 3-ACE provides a new perspective on how multi-agent collaboration can address fundamental limitations of current models. We hope this work encourages further exploration of structured multi-agent reasoning frameworks and perception-aware context engineering for more reliable and robust multimodal intelligence. 13 References 

Anthropic. Effective context engineering for ai agents. https://anthropic.com/engineering/ effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents , 2025a. Accessed: 2025. Anthropic. Model context protocol: A universal standard for ai context. https://modelcontextprotocol. io , 2025b. Accessed: 2025. Shuang Ao, Flora D Salim, and Salman Khan. EMAC+: Embodied multimodal agent for collaborative planning with VLM+LLM. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19905 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19905 .Bernd Bohnet, Rumen Dangovski, Kevin Swersky, Sherry Moore, Arslan Chaudhry, Kathleen Kenealy, and Noah Fiedel. A comparative analysis of llm adaptation: Sft, lora, and icl in data-scarce scenarios. 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00130 .L. Chen et al. Unleashing the potential of prompt engineering for large language models. Patterns , 2025. URL 

https://sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389925001084 .Y. Chen et al. The aftermath of DrawEduMath: Vision language models struggle with handwritten math perception. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00925 , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.00925 .S. Chung et al. What MLLMs learn about when they learn about multimodal reasoning: Perception, reasoning, or their integration? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01719 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01719 .Mohamed Elnoor, Kasun Weerakoon, Gamini Seneviratne, et al. VLM-GroNav: Robot navigation using physically grounded vision-language models in outdoor environments. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/ 11128264/ .M. Endo et al. Downscaling intelligence: Revealing perception and reasoning bottlenecks in small multimodal models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2026. URL https://web.stanford.edu/~markendo/projects/downscaling_ intelligence.html .Roya Firoozi, Johnathan Tucker, Stephen Tian, et al. Foundation models in robotics: Applications, challenges, and the future. International Journal of Robotics Research , 2025. URL https://journals.sagepub. com/doi/abs/10.1177/02783649241281508 .Di Guo, Yu Xiang, Shuai Zhao, Xiaolong Zhu, et al. PhyGrasp: Generalizing robotic grasping with physics-informed large multimodal models. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/11246481/ .X. Jia et al. Fast, slow, and tool-augmented thinking for LLMs: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.12265 ,2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.12265 .Jia Jiang, Jun Zhou, Bo Peng, Xin Ning, and Zheng Zhu. Analyzing fine-grained alignment and enhancing vision understanding in multimodal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17316 , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17316 .Andrej Karpathy. Context engineering: The core of ai coding. https://pureai.com/articles/2025/09/ 23/karpathy-puts-context-at-the-core-of-ai-coding.aspx , 2025. Accessed: 2025. Kei Kawaharazuka, Jean Oh, Jun Yamada, Ingmar Posner, et al. Vision-language-action models for robotics: A review towards real-world applications. IEEE Access , 2025. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ abstract/document/11164279/ .Muhammad Tariq Khan and Abdul Waheed. Foundation model driven robotics: A comprehensive review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10087 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.10087 .LangChain. Context engineering for agents. https://blog.langchain.com/ context-engineering-for-agents , 2025. Accessed: 2025. S. Li et al. Perception, reason, think, and plan: A survey on large multimodal reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.04921 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04921 .X. Li et al. Chain-of-region: Visual language models need details for diagram analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025b. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=M6fYrICcQs .

14 Zheng Li, Rui Luo, Jun Zhang, Ming Qiu, Xiao-Jia Huang, et al. Vocot: Unleashing visually grounded multi-step reasoning in large multi-modal models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , 2025c. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.192.pdf .Z. Lin et al. Mind with eyes: from language reasoning to multimodal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18071 ,2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18071 .P. Liu et al. VLM-FO1: Bridging the gap between high-level reasoning and fine-grained perception in VLMs. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25916 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25916 .Y. Liu et al. FigR: Improve the frontier of reasoning with active visual thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24297 ,2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/html/2512.24297v1 .Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. URL 

https://mathvista.github.io/ .Cheng Lv, Biao Zhang, Yang Yong, Ruihao Gong, Yue Huang, Shuo Gu, et al. Llmc+: Benchmarking vision-language model compression with a plug-and-play toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09981 , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09981 .Xiangyu Ma, Zhuoyi Ding, Zhen Luo, Cheng Chen, Zhiyuan Guo, Derek F. Wong, et al. Deepperception: Advancing r1-like cognitive visual perception in mllms for knowledge-intensive visual grounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12797 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.12797 .Maxim AI. Advanced prompt engineering techniques in 2025. Technical Blog, 2025. URL https://getmaxim. ai/articles/advanced-prompt-engineering-techniques-in-2025 .Miguel Oliveira, Felipe Santos, Carlos Ferreira, Ana Almeida, and Gustavo Rati. Exploring the future of robotics through physics informed vision based foundations. TechRxiv Preprint , 2025. URL https://www. techrxiv.org/doi/full/10.36227/techrxiv.176106902.20394622 .Aske Plaat, Annie Wong, Suzan Verberne, Joost Broekens, et al. Multi-step reasoning with large language models: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 2025. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3774896 .Soujanya Poria, Navonil Majumder, Chia-Yu Hung, Amir Ali Bagherzadeh, Chuan Li, Kenneth Kwok, Ziwei Wang, Cheston Tan, Jiajun Wu, and David Hsu. 10 open challenges steering the future of vision-language-action models. 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05936 .Wei Qian, Zheng Shang, Di Wen, and Tao Fu. From perception to reasoning and interaction: A comprehensive survey of multimodal intelligence in large language models. TechRxiv Preprints , 2025. URL https: //www.techrxiv.org/doi/full/10.36227/techrxiv.176472911.13119857 .Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Lan-guage agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 36, 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/ hash/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html .Zheng Su, Peng Xia, Hao Guo, Zheng Liu, Yue Ma, Xiao Qu, Jia Liu, Yue Li, et al. Thinking with images for multimodal reasoning: Foundations, methods, and future frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23918 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23918 .Xiao Sui, Di Tian, Qian Sun, Rui Chen, Daniel Choi, et al. From grounding to manipulation: Case studies of foundation model integration in embodied robotic systems. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , 2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/anthology-files/ anthology-files/pdf/findings/2025.findings-emnlp.69.pdf .Xiaoxiao Sun, Mingyang Li, Kun yuan, Min Woo Sun, Mark Endo, Shengguang Wu, Changlin Li, Yuhui Zhang, Zeyu Wang, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Do vlms perceive or recall? probing visual perception vs. memory with classic visual illusions, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22150 .AutoGPT Team. Autogpt: An autonomous gpt-4 experiment. https://github.com/ Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT , 2025. Accessed: 2025. Omkar Thawakar, Dinura Dissanayake, Ketan P. More, et al. Llamav-o1: Rethinking step-by-step visual reasoning in llms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , 2025. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.1247/ .

15 J. Wang et al. Your reasoning benchmark may not test reasoning: Revealing perception bottleneck in abstract reasoning benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21329 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512. 21329 .Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Weikang Shi, Zimu Lu, Houxing Ren, Mingjie Wan, Haotian Zhan, and Hongsheng Gao. Measuring multimodal mathematical reasoning with math-vision dataset. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. URL https://mathllm.github.io/mathvision/ .Wei Wang, Zheng Li, Qian Xu, Lei Li, Yi-Qing Cai, Bo Jiang, et al. Advancing fine-grained visual understanding with multi-scale alignment in multi-modal models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2025b. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. emnlp-main.721/ .Yue Wang, Di Gao, Bo Li, Rui Long, Liang Yi, Xiaobo Cai, et al. Cof: Coarse to fine-grained image understanding for multi-modal large language models. In ICASSP 2025 - IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , 2025c. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10889170/ .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 35, pages 24824–24837, 2022. J. Wu et al. How vision becomes language: A layer-wise information-theoretic analysis of multimodal reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15580 , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15580 .Yiyang Wu, Wenhao Yu, Yichen Cheng, Yue Wang, Xiaoyu Zhang, et al. Alignmmbench: Evaluating chinese multimodal alignment in large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. acl-long.327/ .G. Xu et al. LLaVA-CoT: Let vision language models reason step-by-step. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025a. URL 

https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2025/papers/Xu_LLaVA-CoT_Let_Vision_ Language_Models_Reason_Step-by-Step_ICCV_2025_paper.pdf .P. Xu, S. Xiong, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, et al. MARS2 2025 challenge on multimodal reason-ing: Datasets, methods, results, discussion, and outlook. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW) , 2025b. URL https: //openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2025W/MARS2/html/Xu_MARS2_2025_Challenge_ on_Multimodal_Reasoning_Datasets_Methods_Results_Discussion_ICCVW_2025_paper.html .Peng Xu, Shuai Xiong, Jian Zhang, Yun Chen, et al. Mars2 2025 challenge on multimodal reasoning: Datasets, methods, results, discussion, and outlook. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW) , 2025c. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ ICCV2025W/MARS2/ .W. Xu and K. Forbus. Understanding diagrams with explicit intermediate visual representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= DK12xjiCE1 .Yao Xu, Jie Wang, Rui Zhang, Gang Liu, Chen Zhao, Guang Sun, et al. Integrating large vision models into agentic AI communications and networking: A survey. TechRxiv Preprint , 2025d. URL https: //www.techrxiv.org/doi/full/10.36227/techrxiv.176704888.89434041 .Hangyu Xue, Fei Tang, Minghao Hu, Yong Liu, Qingliang Huang, Yanmin Li, et al. Mmrc: A large-scale benchmark for understanding multimodal large language model in real-world conversation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2025. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1096/ .Hang Yan, Xin Liu, Hao Wang, Zhen Cao, Hao Zheng, Lu Yin, et al. Visuriddles: Fine-grained perception is a primary bottleneck for multimodal large language models in abstract visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02537 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02537 .Yu Yan, Zheng Yuan, Jie Pan, Xiaoyu Tang, Guanghui Yuan, Xiaoran Gu, et al. Data quality management for large vision-language models: Issues, techniques, and prospects. TechRxiv Preprints , 2025b. URL 

https://www.techrxiv.org/doi/full/10.36227/techrxiv.176282213.31303325 .

16 Di Yang, Bowen Cao, Ao Zhang, Wei Gu, Wenhai Hu, et al. Beyond intermediate states: Explaining visual redundancy through language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20540 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2503.20540 .T. Yang et al. Learning when to look: A disentangled curriculum for strategic perception in multimodal reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17227 , 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.17227 .Hao Yao, Rui Zhang, Jie Huang, Jiayi Zhang, Yifan Wang, et al. A survey on agentic multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10991 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.10991 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Syner-gizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. S. Yin et al. ToolVQA: A dataset for multi-step reasoning VQA with external tools. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2025/html/Yin_ToolVQA_A_Dataset_for_ Multi-step_Reasoning_VQA_with_External_Tools_ICCV_2025_paper.html .Yue Zhan, Hao Zhao, Yu Zhu, Shuai Zheng, Fei Yang, et al. Understand, think, and answer: Advancing visual reasoning with large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20753 , 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2505.20753 .J. Zhang et al. VIPER: Empowering the self-evolution of visual perception abilities in VLM. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24285 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24285 .Junlin Zhang, Jue Huang, Shichao Jin, Shiyu Lu, Zhuocheng Zhao, Yao Xu, Fei Xiong, Rui Zhao, Jianwei Liang, Dongliang Zhao, et al. Large multimodal agents: A survey. Artificial Intelligence Review , 58(2):1–51, 2025b. doi: 10.1007/s44267-025-00093-y. Renrui Zhang, Dongzhi Jiang, Yichi Zhang, Haokun Lin, Ziyu Guo, Pengshuo Qiu, Aojun Zhou, Pan Lu, Kai-Wei Chang, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. Mathverse: Does your multi-modal llm truly see the diagrams in visual math problems? In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. URL 

https://mathverse-cuhk.github.io/ .W. Zhang et al. Efficiently integrate large language models with visual perception: A survey. Information Fusion , 2026. URL https://sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253525004920 .Y. Zhang et al. CoT-VLA: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025c. URL https: //cvpr.thecvf.com/virtual/2025/poster/33233 .Cheng Zhou, Ming Wang, Yue Ma, Cheng Wu, Wei Chen, Zheng Qian, et al. From perception to cognition: A survey of vision-language interactive reasoning in multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25373 , 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25373 .Wei Zhou, Ming Tao, Chen Zhao, Han Guo, et al. PhysVLM: Enabling visual language models to understand robotic physical reachability. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025b. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2025/ html/Zhou_PhysVLM_Enabling_Visual_Language_Models_to_Understand_Robotic_Physical_ Reachability_CVPR_2025_paper.html .W. Zhu et al. From perception to reasoning: Deep thinking empowers multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12861 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.12861 .

17