Title: Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01221v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 02:37:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Dan Qiao 1 2 † Binbin Chen 2 Fengyu Cai 3 Jianlong Chen 1 Wenhao Li 4 Fuxin Jiang 2 Zuzhi Chen 2

Hongyuan Zha 1 Tieying Zhang ∗ 2 Baoxiang Wang ∗ 1

# Abstract 

Multi-Agent Debate (MAD) has shown promise in leveraging collective intelligence to improve reasoning and reduce hallucinations, yet it re-mains unclear how information exchange shapes the underlying ability. Empirically, MAD ex-hibits paradoxical phenomena, such as accu-racy improvement accompanied by substantial increase in token entropy, and remarkable diver-gence between homogeneous and heterogeneous model combinations. In this paper, we propose a Bayesian uncertainty analysis framework for MAD, which decomposes total predictive uncer-tainty into epistemic uncertainty reducible by de-bate context and aleatoric uncertainty induced by internal model noise. Across multiple model con-figurations, we find that effective debate hinges on achieving high epistemic gain under controlled aleatoric cost. Building on this insight, we design an uncertainty-guided multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithm that explicitly op-timizes aleatoric noise reduction and epistemic information utilization. Experiments show that our training significantly improves post-debate accuracy and stability, and enhances individual reasoning beyond single-agent RL, providing a unified Bayesian uncertainty perspective for un-derstanding and improving MAD. 

# 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable general-purpose capabilities, yet 

> †

Work done during intern at ByteBrain team in ByteDance, Beijing. Working Paper. 1School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2ByteDance Inc, Beijing, China 3Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 

> 4

School of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Baoxiang Wang <bxwang@cuhk.edu.cn>, Tieying Zhang <zhangtieying@bytedance.com>. Preprint. Under review. 

these models remain susceptible to hallucinations and brit-tle reasoning in complex scenarios such as math prob-lems. Inspired by human argumentation, Multi-Agent De-bate (MAD) has emerged as a prominent inference-time paradigm to achieve more reliable responses by integrating perspectives from multiple source LLMs (Du et al., 2023). Specifically, MAD constructs input for each round by or-chestrating task roles, prompt strategies, or communication topologies across multiple LLMs, and aggregates the fi-nal responses through major voting or the LLM-as-a-Judge approach. Previous studies have shown that iterative de-bate can elicit a "wisdom of crowds" effect (Minsky, 1986), which induces higher-level reasoning abilities such as verifi-cation and self-correction. However, the underlying mechanism driving these perfor-mance gains remains largely opaque. While aggregated outcomes show improvement, the validity of the iterative debate process is increasingly being scrutinized. In Choi et al. (2025), authors removes the major voting process and finds that the mean accuracy of homogeneous agents de-bate often stagnates or even degrades across debate rounds, which implies that the effectiveness of MAD mainly stems from the aggregation process. Furthermore, Wynn et al. (2025) have highlighted a concerning frequency of correct answers flipping to incorrect ones during debate, suggest-ing that LLMs may be driven more by social conformity or sycophantic behavior (Sharma et al., 2024) than by logical deduction. Yao et al. (2025) have also pointed out that the inherent sycophancy of LLMs can hinder the development of positive disagreements into positive consensus during debates, which makes it impossible to effectively utilize constructive disagreements to improve reasoning. These findings indicate that the debate process may not be effec-tive in genuine knowledge discovery and opinion utilization, presenting a critical bottleneck for the field (Wang et al., 2024). In this paper, to understand how information exchange in MAD fundamentally shapes the LLM reasoning ability, we focus on uncertainty quantification (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) of model’s predictive responses under different debate turns and input contexts with math reasoning prob-1

> arXiv:2603.01221v1 [cs.MA] 1 Mar 2026 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning

lems. As shown in Fig. 1, the accuracy rapidly increases and saturates as the debate progresses, accompanied by a significant increase in token entropy, which indicates re-markable changes in model uncertainty. Specifically, we employ epistemic uncertainty to quantify the robustness of an agent’s solution concepts beliefs about problems, and aleatoric uncertainty to capture the inherent decoding noise of the reasoning paths. In particular, we remove the final ag-gregation stage of MAD such as majority voting (Du et al., 2023) or weighted voting (Chen et al., 2024) to focus purely on the belief evolution of individual agents. This frame-work allows us to move beyond simple accuracy metrics and rigorously characterize the dynamics of information flow—particularly within heterogeneous agent setups—by analyzing the drift of probability distributions and entropy shifts throughout the debate trajectory. Empirical results across homogeneous and heterogeneous MAD settings have demonstrated that the effectiveness of a debate process is often influenced by two factors: high epistemic uncertainty in the initial state and effective con-trol of aleatoric uncertainty during the debate. The former represents the potential for cognitive conflict and knowl-edge exchange gain, while the latter reflects the cost of debate in utilizing external knowledge and reasoning sta-bility. This implies that superficial interventions on frozen black-box models are insufficient to fundamentally regu-late these internal uncertainty dynamics. To address this challenge, we present a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) method to explicitly optimize external knowledge utilization from heterogeneous models and reduce the in-ternal reasoning uncertainty. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose a Bayesian uncertainty analysis framework for MAD, which rigorously decomposes total predic-tive uncertainty into epistemic uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty, providing a theoretical perspective for un-derstanding the debate dynamics. • Through extensive evaluation of homogeneous and heterogeneous MAD, we reveal that the efficacy of current inference-time MAD is constrained by the un-certainty trade-off between epistemic gain and uncon-trolled aleatoric costs. • We develope an uncertainty-guided MARL algorithm to train models using reward signals to learn efficient debate and information utilization. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that our method not only significantly improves post-debate accuracy but also outperforms the single-agent RL baseline model in independent rea-soning. This suggests that the model has learned to robustly handle uncertainty in reasoning and improve the fundamental reasoning ability even without the aggregation gain of majority voting.  

> Figure 1. Multi agent debate performance with double Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct models. As accuracy (red line) increases, token entropy (blue dash area) with uncertainty also increases significantly.

# 2. Problem Formulation 

2.1. Multi Agent Debate 

Following the most standard MAD settings (Du et al., 2023; Park et al., 2025), we formulate MAD as a T -steps iterative generation process among N agents, where the agents are parameterized by LLM parameters {πθi }Ni=1 . For a given problem x ∼ D sampled from the task dataset, there exists a ground truth answer as y∗. For math reasoning tasks, the reasoning process can be diverse, but the answer is usu-ally numerically unique and can often be precisely verified through string matching against ground truth answer 1. At each round t ∈ { 1, . . . , T }, agent i generates a response yi,t 

conditioned on the original problem x and a changing con-text ci,t as yi,t ∼ πθi (· | x, c i,t ), where the context includes the reference solutions from other agents and additional debate instructions. In the first round, the models usually answers the original question x directly, where the auxiliary context ci, 0 is empty. Formally, this response yi,t with L

tokens is generated autoregressively by agent i as follows: 

πθi (yi,t | x, c i,t ) = 

> L

Y

> l=1

πθi (yl | x, c i,t , y <l ).

The response usually contains intermediate reasoning steps before generating the final answer, which may be enclosed with special symbols <think> in the reasoning models such as OpenAI o1 and DeepSeek-R1 (OpenAI; Guo et al., 2025). Although there are various information schemes for MAD prompts (Li et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), we define a uniform context mapping function Φ

that constructs the input context for each agent based on the global history of peer responses from the previous rounds as 

ci,t = Φ i({Yk}t−1

> k=1

, G, P),

where Yk = {y1,k , . . . , y N,k } represent all agents’ re-sponses in debate turn k, communication topology G de-termines the range of peer agents responses that agent i can access (e.g., fully connected graphs and directed graphs). Agent role prompts P determines how each agent utilizes   

> 1With a slight abuse of notation, we use yto represent both the full responses and the extracted final answers throughout the paper.

2Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

and processes peer agents responses, such as concatenation, introducing additional LLM for summarization, and specific role instructions. At the final turn T , the system prediction results ˆy = Ψ( YT )

will be distilled from all agents responses YT by an aggre-gation function Ψ, such as majority voting (Du et al., 2023), Elo (Zhang & Xiong, 2025), and LLM-as-a-Judge (Zhu et al., 2023). In this work, we focus on analyzing the basic reasoning capabilities of the agent, rather than optimizing the MAD workflow to improve the final accuracy. Therefore, we adopt the most general MAD setting with a fully-connected com-munication graph G containing the responses Yt−1 of all agents from the previous round t − 1, without specialized role-playing or information summarization. Furthermore, we remove the final aggregation step Ψ during our experi-ments to directly capture the evolution of each agents’ indi-vidual response yi,T . This allows us to isolate the impact of information exchange on intrinsic reasoning capability. 

2.2. Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards 

Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) has emerged as a powerful paradigm, which leverages rule-based verifiable binary sparse reward signals to stimulate the high-order complex reasoning capabilities of LLMs by RL training. Recent advances builds upon Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024), a special-ized RL algorithm for reasoning tasks that eliminates the need for training a critic model. In the standard single-agent setting, for each query x, the LLM policy πθ samples a group of G responses {y1, . . . , y G}. For each response yi,a reward function R(yi, y ∗) evaluates the final answer and provide the binary rewards, which is R = 1 if the answer correct and R = 0 otherwise. Then the GRPO objective is defined as:                  

> J(θ) = Ex∼D ,{yi}Gi=1 ∼πθ(·| x)
> h1
> G
> GX
> g=1
> 1
> |yi|
> |yi|
> X
> j=1
> 
> min
> 
> ri,j (θ)Ai,j ,
> clip( ri,j ,1−ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ai,j
> 
> −βD KL (πθ∥πref )
> i
> ,(1)

where ri,j = πθ (yi,j |x)   

> πθold (yi,j |x)

represents the token-level ratio, 

Ai,j = Ri−mean ({R}Gi=1 ) 

> std ({R}Gi=1 )

represents the group-normalized advantage, and β controls the KL divergence penalty. This critic-free method can effectively stabilize the training of LLM inference and is widely used in math, code, and agentic training tasks (Yu et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025). In our work, we extend vanilla GRPO into multi agent scenarios by treating the debate process as a learnable multi-agent multi-step decision process and optimizing πθi

with dense rewards to maximize the team accuracy as shown in Section 4.1. 

# 3. Uncertainty Mechanism in MAD 

In this section, we analyze the dynamic behaviors of multi-agent debate (MAD) through an uncertainty decomposition lens. In Section 3.1, we formalize multi-turn debate as an iterative Bayesian update process, where agents exchange information as noisy evidence to shape latent beliefs about math reasoning and refined responses. In Section 3.2, we decompose the system-level uncertainty and identify an epistemic-gain versus aleatoric-cost tradeoff, supported by extensive experiments under both homogeneous and hetero-geneous debate settings. Furthermore, in Section 3.3, we investigate how changing context ci,t affects the uncertainty of individual agents, and provide theoretical analysis that heterogeneous debates can yield larger epistemic gains than homogeneous debates. 

3.1. Iterative Bayesian Belief Update of MAD 

Motivated by recent research about LLMs as implicit Bayesian inference process (Jayasekera et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2025), we formalize agent i’s re-sponse generation as a hierarchical sampling process to isolate the latent beliefs φi from the observed text responses 

yi,t . Latent belief variable φi represents the agent’s im-plicit belief about the given problem x over the potential math problems solution space given the debate context ci,t .This can reflect the agent’s current knowledge-based under-standing of the problem, such as mathematical theorems, analytical methods, and problem-solving logic. The ob-served text response yi,t is then obtained by autoregressive sampling in the vocabulary space by the LLM πθi , which can be considered as being driven by the latent belief φi as 

yi,t ∼ p(y | φi). Since the LLM parameters θi is frozen in MAD and can be omitted in the notations, the poste-rior predictive distribution over responses is obtained by marginalizing out the latent belief as 

p(yi,t | x, c i,t ) = 

Z

p(yi,t | φi) p(φi | x, c i,t ) dφ i.

Therefore, the process of updating responses through mul-tiple rounds of debate in MAD can be understood as an iterative Bayesian belief update process. By adding addi-tional reference solutions to change the context ci,t between rounds, the agent’s latent belief p(φi | x, c i,t ) is implicitly updated, which in turn changes the posterior prediction dis-tribution p(yi,t | x, c i,t ) and may change the final answer. For example, compared with the first turn initial responses 

yi, 0, the updated belief at turn t can be modeled as the Bayesian update over the latent variable as 

p(φi | x, c i,t ) ∝ p(ci,t | φi, x ) p(φi | x), (2) where p(ci,t | φi, x ) represents the implicit likelihood of the peer agents’ reference solutions given the agent’s latent 3Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

belief state under context ci,t . Intuitively, the effective de-bate contexts can shift the agent’s posterior belief towards the ground truth and thus improve the predictive accuracy with better posterior p(yi,t | x, c i,t ).Unlike multiple-choice questions with limited options, math reasoning problems may often have an infinite space of answers. Considering that the ground-truth answer is usually unique up to an equivalence relation, we can simplify the belief space with binary correctness event for agent i at turn 

t as hi,t := 1[yi,t ∈ Y ∗] ∈ { 0, 1}, where Y∗ ⊆ Y denotes the set of responses equivalent to the ground-truth answer. Accordingly, the predictive belief of correctness is 

p(hi,t = 1 | x, c i,t ) = X

> y∈Y ∗

p(yi,t = y | x, c i,t ).

Then we have the following lemma regarding the correctness of agent i’s responses at turn t as 

Lemma 3.1 (Noisy Debate Accuracy Update) . Given an input question x, assuming that the initial context is empty and debate context ct is valid as p(ct | x) > 0, the log-odds of the binary hypothesis h ∈ { 0, 1} after debate can be written as 

log p(h = 1 | x, c t)

p(h = 0 | x, c t) = log p(h = 1 | x)

p(h = 0 | x) +log p(ct | h = 1 , x )

p(ct | h = 0 , x ) .

The derivation of Lemma 3.1 is based on the MAD Bayeisan belief update equation (2), whereas the more detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.1. It is noted that the additive term log p(ct|h=1 ,x ) 

> p(ct|h=0 ,x )

is the log Bayes factor induced by the debate context ct. If it is pos-itive, it means that the debate context provides effective evidence to improve the response correctness and may in-duce a flip from wrong to correct ( W → C). Conversely, the debate context ct is more likely to be induced by incor-rect beliefs and will deviate the initial belief away from ground truth, thus leading negative flip from correct to wrong ( C → W ). This provides a theoretical perspective on the stagnation of accuracy and the deterioration of a large number of correct answers observed in many existing MAD works (Choi et al., 2025; Wynn et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025). Surprisingly, this means that MAD may not guarantee the full utilization of correct cues in the debate contexts: even if the solutions provided by peers contain useful information, internal beliefs can still be misled and generate incorrect responses. 

3.2. System-Level Uncertainty Trade-off in MAD 

Quantifying the uncertainty of large models is crucial for understanding the reliability of the responses. However, due to the large scale of LLM parameters and high-dimensional generation space, traditional uncertainty estimation methods based on deep Bayes networks or dropout inference (Laksh-minarayanan et al., 2017; Li & Gal, 2017) are impractical to LLM-based reasoning process. Moreover, the implicit la-tent belief state φi is also computational intractable for large LLMs (Abbasi Yadkori et al., 2024; Jayasekera et al., 2025). To address the above limitations, we consider quantifying and decomposing the uncertainty of the MAD system based on the answer-level metrics using the predictive distribution of multiple agents. The core intuition is that the MAD system can be viewed as a natural ensemble of multiple predictive experts. Each agent in MAD provides distinct prediction yi about the answer under the same question x and debate contexts c, where the homogeneous models can be distinct by different seeds and the heterogeneous models are pre-trained independently. More specifically, instead of assuming these responses as exact posterior samples from a joint distribution, we adopt an ensemble-of-experts proxy by mixing the answer-level distributions of each agent, where the system’s collective predictive distribution is thus approximated by a mixture model as 

psys (yt = Y | x, C t) := 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

p(yi,t = Y | x, c i,t ),

This ensemble proxy also aligns with Bayesian belief up-date under the mild assumption that each agent’s distribution 

pi(y) can be viewed as an expert corresponding to implicit sampling, such that the cross-expert average approximates the Bayesian model average. Therefore, the mixture distri-bution psys can be interpreted as an approximate posterior prediction distribution. Then we can quantify the total un-certainty (TU) as the entropy of the collective predictive distribution H[psys (y∗ | x, C t)] . By definition of general-ized Jensen-Shannon divergence, we can decompose the TU of MAD into epistemic uncertainty (EU) and aleatoric uncertainty (AU) as follows. 

Proposition 3.2 (System-level Uncertainty Decomposition) .

Let {pi,t (y)}Ni=1 be agents’ answer-level predictive distribu-tions at turn t, and psys (y) = 1

> N

PNi=1 pi,t (y) be the system mixture distribution. We have 

TU( t) = JSD( p1,t , . . . , p N,t )

| {z }

> Sys

-EU 

+ 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

H(pi,t )

| {z }

> Sys

-AU 

, (3) 

where the system epistemic uncertainty (Sys-EU) is defined as Sys -EU( t) := JSD( p1,t , . . . , p N,t ) = H(psys (y)) −

> 1
> N

PNi=1 H(pi,t ), and the system aleatoric uncertainty (Sys-AU) is defined as Sys -AU( t) := 1

> N

PNi=1 H(pi,t ).

This enables a simple and scalable decomposition of system-level uncertainty, where the Sys-EU represents the reducible 4Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning          

> (a) Success Homogeneous MAD (b) Neutral Homogeneous MAD (c) Fail Homogeneous MAD
> (d) Success Heterogeneous MAD (e) Neutral Heterogeneous MAD (f) Fail Heterogeneous MAD
> Figure 2. Overview of uncertainty decomposition in MAD. The purple dashed area represents the system epistemic uncertainty and the gray line represents the total uncertainty. The blue and orange lines represent the accuracy on the test datasets. Top row: Homogeneous multi agent debate. Bottom row: Heterogeneous multi agent debate.

cognitive uncertainty between agents responses, while the Sys-AU represents the entropy within the agents induced by decoding randomnesses and computational instability (Feng et al., 2025b; Ling et al., 2024). It is noted that in math reasoning tasks with deterministic answers, the questions and data often lack randomness, which is the classic source of accidental uncertainty. In this paper, we mainly define Sys-AU as the randomness of the LLM decoding process, including the generation randomness introduced by long ad-ditional contexts and potentially out-of-distribution prompts and accidental sampling errors in numerical computation. To validate this theoretical decomposition, we evaluate both homogeneous and heterogeneous MAD configurations on a subset of MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset with 

N = 2 agents, T = 5 debate rounds, and G = 16 rollouts for every prompt. More experiments details refer to Ap-pendix C.5. In Figure 6, we present representative debate combinations under homogeneous and heterogeneous set-tings. Across all settings, Sys-EU consistently decreases with debate turns, which indicates that MAD acts as a consensus-seeking process regardless of the correctness. In contrast, performance differences are primarily explained by the trade-off between both uncertainties. Successful de-bates can keep Sys-AU low or decreasing, while failure cases usually exhibit large and explosive growing Sys-AU that overwhelms the benefit of disagreement reduction. In addition, heterogeneous MAD with one common participant typically start with higher initial Sys-EU than homogeneous pairs, which reveals that the larger initial cognitive gap can bring greater potential cognitive gains. However, these ben-efits can only be realized if utilization costs Sys-AU are controlled. 

3.3. Epistemic Advantage of Heterogeneous MAD 

In the previous section 3.2, the system-level uncertainty analysis have summarized that debate accuracy is jointly affected by epistemic knowledge gain and internal aleatoric cost, yet insufficient to explain how the specific agent re-sponse changes. Therefore, we analyze the uncertainty differences of a single agent with homogeneous peers and heterogeneous peers. Similar to Proposition 3.2, we quan-tify the uncertainty of the agent’s prediction with answer distributions. By applying the law of total entropy (Laksh-minarayanan et al., 2017), we have: 

H[pi(yi,t | x, c i,t )] = − X

> yi,t

p(yi,t | x, c i,t ) log p(yi,t | x, c i,t )= Eφi∼p(φi|x,c i,t )[H(p(yi,t | φi, x, c i,t )] 

| {z }

> Aleatoric Uncertainty

+ I(yi,t ; φi | x, c i,t )

| {z }

> Epistemic Uncertainty

.

The epistemic term represents the mutual information be-tween the prediction and the latent belief, which can be rewritten as the expected Kullback-Leibler divergence be-tween the conditional and marginal distributions as 

I(yi,t ; φi) = Eφi [DKL (p(yi,t | x, φ i) ∥ p(yi,t | x, c i,t ))] .

In the context of debate, high EU values indicate that the current context ci,t can significantly influence reasoning and deviate the output prediction from the model’s original inter-nal beliefs, such as by introducing low-probability solution 5Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

methods or correcting high-probability illusion errors. The ideal goal of debate is to provide key information in ci,t to guide the model’s beliefs toward a distribution that has a high probability of producing the ground truth answer. Therefore, a successful debate step should reduce EU by incorporating new evidence, which can be defined as the Epistemic Gain provided by the additional peer message m

as Gepi (m) := I(φ; m | x, c ).

Theorem 3.3 (Heterogeneous evidence yields larger epis-temic gain) . Given an input question x and a current context 

c, considering that mhomo is the peer message from a ho-mogeneous model and mhetero is the peer message from a heterogeneous model. Assume the heterogeneous novelty condition :

I(φ; mhetero | x, c, m homo ) ≥ I(φ; m′ 

> homo

| x, c, m homo ),

where m′ 

> homo

is another independent homogeneous sample. Then the heterogeneous message provides strictly larger epistemic gain: 

Gepi (mhetero ) ≥ Gepi (mhomo ).

Theorem 3.3 provides a Bayesian uncertainty perspective to explain why heterogeneous debates are generally supe-rior to homogeneous debates. Intuitively, heterogeneous partners can provide complementary evidence beyond the inference scope of homogeneous models, offering a greater potential to alter the distribution of underlying beliefs. For homogeneous models, even if sampled responses differ with different prompts or seeds, they often stem from similar latent belief variables, which reinforce existing beliefs after debate and manifesting as a tend for consensus rather than correctness (Wynn et al., 2025). This theoretical insight aligns with empirical observations in section 3.2: heteroge-neous debate typically can produce more diverse answers and achieve higher accuracies through effective debate pro-cesses, while homogeneous debate often cannot exceed the upper limit of single agent reasoning (Zhang et al., 2025a). 

# 4. Uncertainty-Guided MARL for MAD 

Based on the analysis in Section 3, the debate process in MAD is primarily influenced by the knowledge gains from irreducible epistemic uncertainty and the cost of unstable answers due to aleatoric uncertainty. Therefore, we model the MAD process as a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) problem to fundamentally alter the distribution of internal beliefs to achieve effective debate capabilities. Our method, named Uncertainty-Guided Multi-Agent Debate 

(UMAD) Reinforcement Learning, optimizes the agent’s policy using verifiable rewards of responses, enabling it to simultaneously calibrate internal confidence to handle aleatoric uncertainty and leverage epistemic uncertainty to effectively influence other agents. 

4.1. MAD as a Dec-POMDP 

Motivated by recent works on multi-LLMs cooperative learning (Park et al., 2025; Liao et al., 2025; Wan et al., 2025), we formulate the multi-agent debate reinforcement learning as a decentralized partially observable Markov deci-sion process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek et al., 2016) defined by the tuple ⟨N , S, A, P, R, Ω, O, γ ⟩.Specifically, at each round t, each agent i ∈ 1, . . . , N ob-serves the debate context oi,t = x ⊕ ci,t including the query x and debate contexts as the local observation of the overall debate history states S. The response sequences of LLM i is the agent i’s action at step t, which contains intermediate reasoning steps and final answers. To induce collaborative improvement, we employ a dense team reward 

Rt = P 

> i

r(ai,t , y ∗), where the individual reward can be verified easily at every step. Considering the complexity and high computational requirements of training LLMs, we adopt an independent learning paradigm as the algorithm backbone, where each agent maximizes the expected joint return. However, standard independent learning often suf-fers from non-stationarity and coarse credit assignment in MAD. We address these using a two-pronged uncertainty-guided mechanism. 

4.2. Uncertainty-Guided Optimization Mechanisms 

Based on the uncertainty trade-off identified in Section 3, we introduce two regulation mechanisms that encourage epistemic gains and reduce aleatoric costs during policy optimization. 

Aleatoric Uncertainty-Aware Advantage. Agents in de-bate often exhibit miscalibrated confidence, manifesting as "stubborn hallucinations" or "hesitant reasoning." To regu-late aleatoric noise, we employ a confidence-aware advan-tage shaping mechanism. Motivated by (Xie et al., 2025), we utilize the token-level negative log-probability ˆUi as a proxy for generation uncertainty to modulate the standard advantage Ai, t :

Aau  

> i,t

= W ( ˆUi) · Ai,t , (4) where ˆUi = − 1

> |yi,t |

P|yi,t | 

> j=1

log πθi (yi,t,j |x, c i,t , y i,t,<j ) rep-resents the token mean negative log-probs. The weight function is defined as: 

W ( ¯Ui) = exp( −αau · ¯Ui)

where ¯Ui = ˆUi−μG  

> σG+ϵ

represents the group-standardized uncer-tainty, αau is a hyperparameter. This mechanism is designed to amplify the reward for high-confidence correct responses while intensifying the penalty for high-confidence incorrect ones. Conversely, it suppresses the advantage of responses with high relative uncertainty ( ¯Ui > 0), effectively anchor-ing the model’s reasoning against aleatoric noise. This 6Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

explicitly incentivizes the model to suppress entropy when correct, effectively anchoring the correct reasoning paths against context noise. 

Epistemic Influence Intrinsic Reward. To maximize the epistemic gain Gepi , effective debate requires agents to not only be correct but also persuasive. The core intuition is that the same context can have different effects on LLMs with different belief likelihoods. Therefore, in addition to correctness rewards, we need to incentive samples that can be more effectively utilized by others. We introduce an intrinsic reward reu  

> i,t

that quantifies the positive information gain provided to peers: 

reu  

> i,t

= ηN − 1

X 

> j̸=i

∆Rpeer (j, t + 1) , (5) where ∆Rpeer denotes the average correctness improve-ments of multiple rollout trajectories in GRPO with agent 

i’s reference solutions. This mechanism directly rewards the resolution of system-level epistemic uncertainty, encour-aging agents to generate evidence that effectively bridges the cognitive gap with their peers. 

# 5. Experimental Setup 

5.1. Experiment Settings Debate Configurations. For homogeneous debate, we choose double Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct as the stable settings with stable instruction following and problem-solving ability. To construct a heteroge-neous debate system with enough epistemic divergence and tolerable aleatoric uncertainty, we selected two different models with generational differences from the Qwen series as Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct and 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Yang et al., 2024a; 2025a). 

Datasets The agents are trained on the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021) with 7,500 training samples using a two-round-debate training protocol with Ttrain = 2 . This efficient setup tests our hypothesis that effective debate re-quires balancing accuracy and informativeness in localized sequential rounds of interaction, which enables the debate modes to be extended to a longer-term process. During inference, we extend the debate to Ttest = 5 rounds to eval-uate robustness and generalization against mode collapse. We assess in-distribution performance on MATH500 test datset with 500 samples and generalization capability on out-of-distribution tasks ranging from grade-school math (GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)) to olympiad-level competi-tions (AMC2023, AIME24, AIME25 (Knovel Engineering, 2025; Art of Problem Solving, 2024; 2025)). 

Baselines. We validate our method against three baselines: (1) Zero-Shot MAD as the standard inference baseline; and (2) Standard IPPO, a multi-agent baseline without uncer-tainty guidance, to verify the necessity of our proposed regulating mechanisms. Implementation details and hyper-parameters are provided in Appendix C.2. 

5.2. Main Results 

Our results demonstrate that uncertainty-guided training substantially amplifies the benefits of heterogeneous inter-action (Table 1). In asymmetric pairings, UMAD consis-tently lifts the weaker agent across rounds while preserving the stronger agent’s accuracy, yielding the largest gains at 

T = 5 . This pattern suggests that resolving epistemic un-certainty enables productive exchange: the weaker model benefits from informative counterarguments instead of col-lapsing into agreement. In contrast to Zero-Shot MAD, where performance gaps often induce sycophancy and su-perficial alignment, UMAD rewards epistemic influence and encourages persuasive, evidence-carrying reasoning rather than conformity. In homogeneous settings, the training gains of both IPPO and UMAD are modest and largely saturate, exposing a ceil-ing when epistemic diversity is limited. The improvements over zero-shot MAD baselines are small, which is consistent with the view that homogeneous debate mainly acts as self-consistency (Choi et al., 2025). Without an external source of lower-entropy information, extensive epistemic overlap constrains progress. Notably, UMAD avoids the round-wise degradation seen in Zero-Shot baselines under social pressure or sycophancy (Wynn et al., 2025), stabilizing the debate even when it cannot introduce new knowledge. Finally, Table 1 shows that longer debates tend to accu-mulate contextual noise for baseline methods, leading to saturation or decline, whereas UMAD remains robust as 

T increases. The consistent improvements up to T = 5 ,especially in heterogeneous and out-of-distribution tasks, indicate that uncertainty calibration decouples debate length from mode collapse. By learning to ignore irrelevant con-text and maintain confidence only in stable reasoning paths, agents sustain constructive long-context interaction. 

5.3. Ablation Analysis Effectiveness of Uncertainty Guidance. Comparing UMAD with Standard IPPO isolates the gain of our pro-posed mechanisms. UMAD outperforms IPPO by nearly 5.1% and Zero-Shot MAD by 14% on heterogeneous MATH (T = 5 ). We observe that standard IPPO agents tend to con-vergence of lazy consensus and short responses such as "I agree both agents’ answers." . In contrast, UMAD’s epis-temic influence rewards drive "truth-seeking" constructive conflict, effectively pushing the system out of local optima in harder problems. 7Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Table 1. Comparisons of individual agent accuracy across initial responses ( T = 1 ) and debate responses ( T = 2 , 5). We report pass@1 

results for both homogeneous and heterogeneous MAD settings using Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

> Debate Models Method (Round) GSM8K MATH500 AMC23 AIME24 AIME25 Average A0 A1 A0 A1 A0 A1 A0 A1 A0 A1 A0 A1 Homogeneous MAD
> A0: Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
> A1: Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
> Zero-Shot ( T= 1 )83.3 83.3 61.0 61.0 35.0 45.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.9 37.9 Zero-Shot ( T= 2 )83.4 84.1 63.0 64.6 30.0 40.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.3 37.7 Zero-Shot ( T= 5 )83.4 84.6 64.4 64.6 42.5 42.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 38.1 38.3 IPPO ( T= 1 )83.4 82.3 65.2 62.2 45.0 45.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 38.7 37.9 IPPO ( T= 2 )83.4 83.3 65.8 64.2 42.5 47.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 38.3 39.0 IPPO ( T= 5 )83.5 83.7 65.8 65.6 47.5 47.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 39.4 39.4 UMAD ( T= 1 )82.6 83.7 62.4 63.4 42.5 37.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.5 36.9 UMAD ( T= 2 )83.9 84.1 63.4 63.8 47.5 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 39.0 39.6 UMAD ( T= 5 )83.9 83.7 65.4 64.4 47.5 52.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 39.4 40.1 Heterogeneous MAD
> A0: Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
> A1: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> Zero-Shot ( T= 1 )82.8 90.4 63.6 75.2 37.5 60.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 36.8 45.1 Zero-Shot ( T= 2 )85.6 90.3 72.0 77.8 50.0 65.0 0.0 3.3 0.0 0.0 41.5 47.2 Zero-Shot ( T= 5 )87.3 90.5 78.2 84.6 60.0 75.0 0.0 3.3 0.0 0.0 45.1 50.6 IPPO ( T= 1 )82.0 90.1 62.6 76.0 27.5 55.0 0.0 3.3 0.0 0.0 34.4 44.9 IPPO ( T= 2 )84.1 89.8 73.6 79.8 60.0 70.5 0.0 3.3 0.0 6.7 43.5 50.0 IPPO ( T= 5 )88.3 90.3 81.0 85.1 70.5 82.5 0.0 3.3 0.0 13.3 48.0 54.9 UMAD ( T= 1 )82.8 89.4 62.2 76.8 47.5 60.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.7 38.5 46.6 UMAD ( T= 2 )86.7 90.1 77.8 82.6 67.5 72.5 0.0 3.3 0.0 13.3 46.4 52.4 UMAD ( T= 5 )89.7 90.5 86.0 87.2 77.5 87.5 0.0 10.0 0.0 13.3 50.6 57.7

Generalization to Long Horizons. Notably, agents trained on short horizons ( Ttrain = 2 ) successfully generalize to 

T = 5 debates without divergence. This confirms that the model learns a robust "propose-refine" deliberation policy rather than overfitting to specific trajectory lengths, proving that computationally expensive long-context training is not strictly necessary for stable debate. 

Visualizing Uncertainty Dynamics. Fig. 3 validates our theoretical motivation. Post-training, aleatoric uncertainty consistently declines across rounds for both agents. Cru-cially, the weaker agent’s accuracy shifts from stagnation to a steady ascent, perfectly mirroring its dropped uncer-tainty. This indicates it is not merely mimicking, but actively resolving epistemic ambiguity by "anchoring" its belief dis-tribution to the valid reasoning of the stronger peer. 

# 6. Related Works 

Multi Agent Debate. Prior works in MAD (Du et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024) demonstrated that it-erative debates can induce diverse thoughts with "Society of Minds" and outperform single-agent prompt techniques such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) and Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023) in reasoning tasks. Most of these works focus on workflow design for specific problems (Liu et al., 2024; Zhang & Xiong, 2025; Maiga et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025), optimization of communication topologies (Li et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2025; Eo et al., 2025), and eval-uation of the capabilities of different model combinations (Zhang et al., 2025a; Smit et al., 2023). Recent studies have incorporated confidence into the debate interactions, where the confidences of peer opinions are used as additional in-

(a) Base Models 

(b) UMAD Models 

Figure 3. Uncertainty dynamics (grey and purple) vs. Accuracy (orange and blue). UMAD training suppresses aleatoric noise and improves both agents’ accuracies across debate turns. 

formation in input prompts to calibrate the reasoning (Yang et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024), or serve as the weights for answer aggregation (Lin & Hooi, 2025; Eo et al., 2025; Yoffe et al., 2024). However, the efficacy of these inference-time interventions is increasingly challenged due to the susceptibility of LLMs to sycophancy and long contexts drift (Choi et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). Empirical findings suggest that debate in homogeneous settings often stagnates 8Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

or tends to reach consensus rather than correctness without incentive (Wynn et al., 2025). Yao et al. (2025) introduced controlled sycophancy level in prompts to distinguish LLMs as peacemaker or trouble-maker with an additional judge, which demonstrates the importance of introducing effective opinion conflict in improving the accuracy of debate. Unlike existing methods that treat the model as a frozen black box and rely on textual confidence representations, we propose a method for numerically quantifying uncertainty in the MAD process. Furthermore, unlike existing methods that focus on adjusting rules in the prompt and aggregation stages, we train MAD using correctness reward signals, fundamentally reshaping the agent’s belief updates and debating behavior, thereby enabling robust reasoning under uncertainty. Several concurrent studies have explored the diversity and uncertainty of MAD from various perspectives. Zhu et al. (2026) attribute the failures of MAD to low initial diversity and uncalibrated confidence, proposing a textual-confidence-modulated protocol to mitigate sycophancy. Ai et al. (2025) and Li et al. (2026b) focus on optimizing response aggre-gation and reasoning paths to maximize information gains. While Li et al. (2026a) and Pappu et al. (2026) raise con-cerns about the ’leveraging gap’ and ’integrative compro-mise’ in heterogeneous teams, Yang et al. (2026) provides an information-theoretic foundation for the benefits of hetero-geneity via complementary evidence. While these studies collectively highlight the critical roles of diversity and uncer-tainty, they primarily rely on inference-time textual heuris-tics or output-level observations. In contrast, our work for-malizes the debate process as an uncertainty-tradeoff-driven Bayesian belief update process and employs MARL to fun-damentally reshape agents’ debating behaviors and reason-ing strategies. These collective findings provide strong em-pirical and theoretical support for our conclusions regarding the necessity of modeling internal uncertainty to unlock the full potential of multi-agent reasoning. 

Uncertainty in LLM. Uncertainty quantification is pivotal for assessing the trustworthiness of LLMs (Huang et al., 2025). Traditional approaches utilizing token-level proba-bilities often fail to capture semantic meaning, leading to the development of semantic-level metrics (Kuhn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025). By clustering semantically equivalent responses, methods like semantic entropy provide a more robust estimation of model confidence against linguistic vari-ations (Kuhn et al., 2023). More recently, researchers have adopted a Bayesian perspective to decompose predictive uncertainty into aleatoric uncertainty, arising from inherent data ambiguity, and epistemic uncertainty, reflecting the model’s lack of knowledge (Liu et al., 2025c; Huang et al., 2024; Geng et al., 2024). This decomposition has been ex-tensively explored to understand the sources of prediction error such as general Q&A tasks (Abbasi Yadkori et al., 2024) and in-context learning (Jayasekera et al., 2025; Ling et al., 2024), where high epistemic uncertainty typically signals hallucinations or out-of-distribution inputs, while aleatoric uncertainty captures valid multi-answer possibili-ties (Kadavath et al., 2022; Tomov et al., 2025). Other works have further leveraged multi-agent perturbations (Amayue-las et al., 2024) or fine-tuning (Feng et al., 2025b) to better elicit and calibrate these signals. Despite these advantages, existing uncertainty quantification research in LLMs mainly focuses on single agent tasks and textualized quantification in multi-agent tasks. To our best knowledge, this work is the first to utilize internal model indicators to formalize the uncertainty mechanism of MAD and uses the uncertainty-driven MARL algorithm to improve MAD’s resistance to uncertainty interference. 

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in LLMs. With the advantage of LLM-based multi-agent systems, research has transitioned from heuristic-based workflow design to-ward optimizable learning paradigms. Initial explorations of-ten focused on interaction-driven data generation or specific task-oriented roles. For instance, SPIRAL (Liu et al., 2025a) demonstrated that reasoning capabilities could emerge from self-play in zero-sum games, though its primary focus re-mained on action-based tasks rather than pure mathematical reasoning. To enhance diversity, Multi-Agent Finetuning (MAFT) (Subramaniam et al., 2025) utilized multi-agent interactions to source diverse reasoning chains, focusing pri-marily on supervised finetuning (SFT) rather than explicit reinforcement learning. ReMA (Wan et al., 2025) intro-duced a hierarchical architecture by alternating between a "Meta-thinking Agent" and a "Reasoning Agent" to decou-ple strategic oversight from execution. More recent studies have adopted MARL perspective to ad-dress the reasoning ability within multi-agent debate frame-work. MAPoRL (Park et al., 2025) was a pioneering effort that formalized the debate process as a MARL problem, employing an IPPO-style (De Witt et al., 2020) training approach to reward persuasive and corrective behaviors. To ensure stable policy updates, MARFT (Liao et al., 2025) pro-posed LaMAS framework to ensure the monotonic policy improvement property motivated by HAPPO (Kuba et al., 2021), specifically tailored for LLM-based agents. Algo-rithmic innovations have also focused on credit assignment and group dynamics. MAGRPO (Liu et al., 2025b) in-troduced a centralized team reward style MARL method based on MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), while AT-GRPO (Zhao et al., 2025) implemented agent and turn-aware grouping to handle the non-stationarity of multi-turn dialogues. Fur-ther research has explored consensus-based alignment in MACA (Samanta et al., 2025) and meta-policy deliberation in MPDF (Yang & Thomason, 2025). To facilitate these intensive training requirements, frameworks like MARTI (Zhang et al., 2025b) have provided scalable infrastructure 9Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

for asynchronous multi-agent rollouts. However, most of these studies are limited to homogeneous model settings and primarily rely on explicit role-prompting to pre-allocate task roles or induce thinking diversity. In contrast, our research focuses on the uncertainty decompo-sition mechanism during the debate process. By utilizing epistemic intrinsic rewards to drive effective heterogeneous knowledge exchange and aleatoric gain to encourage ef-fective exploration, we leverage MARL to fundamentally improve both the reasoning capabilities and the overall ef-fectiveness of multi-agent debates. 

# 7. Conclusion 

In this work, we address the inherent instability and ineffi-ciency of Multi-Agent Debate, particularly in heterogeneous settings, through a Bayesian uncertainty lens. We iden-tify that performance degradation stems from uncontrolled aleatoric noise and the failure to effectively utilize epistemic disagreement. To resolve this, we propose an uncertainty-guided MARL framework that actively regulates internal reasoning confidence and incentivizes constructive informa-tion exchange. Our approach enables robust performance gains and prevents belief collapse in long-turn debates, trans-forming MAD from a fragile inference-time heuristic into a stable, learnable mechanism for reliable reasoning. 

# 8. Limitations and Future Works 

Our UMAD framework relies on multi-round iterative in-teractions between multiple agents. While we demonstrate that training over short debate turns (T=2) can generalize to longer debate turns (T=5), the inference cost is approx-imately linear with N · T . Future work could explore in-tervening in beliefs from a reasoning perspective to strike a balance between accuracy and efficiency. Besides, we employ an expert ensemble approach to approximate the Bayesian posterior distribution and use negative log likeli-hood (NLL) as a proxy for aleatoric uncertainty. While this approach is computationally efficient, token-level NLL are not always perfectly correlated with semantic uncertainty, especially for poorly calibrated models. Further research into more rigorous uncertainty quantification methods, such as semantic clustering of generated paths or variational in-ference, could improve the theoretical framework analysis. 

# Impact Statement 

This work aims to enhance the reliability of Large Lan-guage Models by grounding multi-agent debate in a rigor-ous Bayesian framework. By mitigating confident halluci-nations, our method (UMAD) supports the deployment of trusted AI in critical fields like mathematics and science. However, we acknowledge that explicitly optimizing agents for "persuasiveness" carries potential risks; if applied to subjective or sensitive domains, this mechanism could theo-retically be misused to generate convincing but manipulative content. Future research should ensure such capabilities re-main strictly aligned with factual verification. Additionally, we address the environmental footprint of multi-agent sys-tems by demonstrating that efficient, short-horizon training generalizes effectively to long-context inference. 

# References 

Abbasi Yadkori, Y., Kuzborskij, I., György, A., and Szepes-vari, C. To believe or not to believe your llm: Iterative prompting for estimating epistemic uncertainty. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:58077– 58117, 2024. Ai, R., Pan, Y., Simchi-Levi, D., Tambe, M., and Xu, H. Beyond majority voting: Llm aggregation by leveraging higher-order information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01499 , 2025. Amayuelas, A., Wong, K., Pan, L., Chen, W., and Wang, W. Y. Knowledge of knowledge: Exploring known-unknowns uncertainty with large language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2024 , pp. 6416–6432, 2024. Art of Problem Solving. 2024 aime i problems and solutions. 

https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/ index.php/2024_AIME_I_Problems , 2024. Accessed: 2025-10-11. Art of Problem Solving. 2025 aime i problems and solutions. 

https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/ index.php/2025_AIME_I_Problems , 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-11. Chan, C.-M., Chen, W., Su, Y., Yu, J., Xue, W., Zhang, S., Fu, J., and Liu, Z. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Chen, J., Saha, S., and Bansal, M. Reconcile: Round-table conference improves reasoning via consensus among di-verse llms. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7066–7085, 2024. Choi, H. K., Zhu, X., and Li, Y. Debate or vote: Which yields better decisions in multi-agent large language mod-els? arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17536 , 2025. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, 10 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. De Witt, C. S., Gupta, T., Makoviichuk, D., Makoviychuk, V., Torr, P. H., Sun, M., and Whiteson, S. Is indepen-dent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020. Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Mordatch, I. Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2023. Eo, S., Moon, H., Zi, E. H., Park, C., and Lim, H. De-bate only when necessary: Adaptive multiagent col-laboration for efficient llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05047 , 2025. Feng, L., Xue, Z., Liu, T., and An, B. Group-in-group policy optimization for llm agent training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10978 , 2025a. Feng, Y., Htut, P. M., Qi, Z., Xiao, W., Mager, M., Pappas, N., Halder, K., Li, Y., Benajiba, Y., and Roth, D. Rethink-ing llm uncertainty: A multi-agent approach to estimating black-box model uncertainty. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , 2025:12349– 12375, 2025b. Geng, J., Cai, F., Wang, Y., Koeppl, H., Nakov, P., and Gurevych, I. A survey of confidence estimation and calibration in large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 6577–6595, 2024. Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Zhang, R., Ma, S., Bi, X., et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638, 2025. Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., Arora, A., Basart, S., Tang, E., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring math-ematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874 , 2021. Huang, H.-Y., Yang, Y., Zhang, Z., Lee, S., and Wu, Y. A survey of uncertainty estimation in llms: Theory meets practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15326 , 2024. Huang, Y., Song, J., Wang, Z., Zhao, S., Chen, H., Juefei-Xu, F., and Ma, L. Look before you leap: An exploratory study of uncertainty analysis for large language models. 

IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 2025. Jayasekera, I. S., Si, J., Valdettaro, F., Chen, W., Faisal, A. A., and Li, Y. Variational uncertainty decomposition for in-context learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Jin, B., Zeng, H., Yue, Z., Yoon, J., Arik, S., Wang, D., Zamani, H., and Han, J. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 , 2025. Kadavath, S., Conerly, T., Askell, A., Henighan, T., Drain, D., Perez, E., Schiefer, N., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., DasSarma, N., Tran-Johnson, E., et al. Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 ,2022. Knovel Engineering. Amc-23. https:// huggingface.co/datasets/knoveleng/ AMC-23 , 2025. Kuba, J. G., Chen, R., Wen, M., Wen, Y., Sun, F., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11251 , 2021. Kuhn, L., Gal, Y., and Farquhar, S. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for uncertainty estimation in nat-ural language generation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A., and Blundell, C. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Li, A., Zhang, J., Li, L., Duan, Y., Gao, L., Chen, M., Qin, W., Li, S., Ji, F., Liu, N., et al. M3mad-bench: Are multi-agent debates really effective across domains and modalities? arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.02854 , 2026a. Li, Y. and Gal, Y. Dropout inference in bayesian neural networks with alpha-divergences. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pp. 2052–2061. PMLR, 2017. Li, Y., Du, Y., Zhang, J., Hou, L., Grabowski, P., Li, Y., and Ie, E. Improving multi-agent debate with sparse communication topology. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 7281– 7294, 2024. Li, Z., Zheng, Z., Chen, W., Zhao, J., Chen, Y., Xu, T., and Chen, E. Dynadebate: Breaking homogeneity in multi-agent debate with dynamic path generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05746 , 2026b. Liang, T., He, Z., Jiao, W., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Wang, R., Yang, Y., Shi, S., and Tu, Z. Encouraging divergent think-ing in large language models through multi-agent debate. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical meth-ods in natural language processing , pp. 17889–17904, 2024. 11 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Liao, J., Wen, M., Wang, J., and Zhang, W. Marft: Multi-agent reinforcement fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16129 , 2025. Lin, Z. and Hooi, B. Enhancing multi-agent debate system performance via confidence expression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14034 , 2025. Ling, C., Zhao, X., Zhang, X., Cheng, W., Liu, Y., Sun, Y., Oishi, M., Osaki, T., Matsuda, K., Ji, J., et al. Uncertainty quantification for in-context learning of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10189 , 2024. Liu, B., Guertler, L., Yu, S., Liu, Z., Qi, P., Balcells, D., Liu, M., Tan, C., Shi, W., Lin, M., et al. Spiral: Self-play on zero-sum games incentivizes reasoning via multi-agent multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.24119 , 2025a. Liu, S., Chen, T., Liang, Z., Lyu, X., and Amato, C. Llm collaboration with multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04652 , 2025b. Liu, T., Wang, X., Huang, W., Xu, W., Zeng, Y., Jiang, L., Yang, H., and Li, J. Groupdebate: Enhancing the efficiency of multi-agent debate using group discussion. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14051 , 2024. Liu, X., Chen, T., Da, L., Chen, C., Lin, Z., and Wei, H. Uncertainty quantification and confidence calibration in large language models: A survey. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 , pp. 6107–6117, 2025c. Maiga, A., Shah, A., and Yilmaz, E. Error detection in med-ical note through multi agent debate. In Proceedings of the 24th Workshop on Biomedical Language Processing ,pp. 124–135, 2025. Minsky, M. Society of mind . Simon and Schuster, 1986. Oliehoek, F. A., Amato, C., et al. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs , volume 1. Springer, 2016. OpenAI. Learning to reason with LLMs. https://openai.com/index/ learning-to-reason-with-llms/ .Pan, M. Z., Cemri, M., Agrawal, L. A., Yang, S., Chopra, B., Tiwari, R., Keutzer, K., Parameswaran, A., Ramchandran, K., Klein, D., et al. Why do multiagent systems fail? In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Building Trust in Language Models and Applications , 2025. Pappu, A., El, B., Cao, H., di Nolfo, C., Sun, Y., Cao, M., and Zou, J. Multi-agent teams hold experts back. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01011 , 2026. Park, C., Han, S., Guo, X., Ozdaglar, A., Zhang, K., and Kim, J.-K. Maporl: Multi-agent post-co-training for collaborative large language models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18439 , 2025. Samanta, A., Magesh, A., Wu, R., Jain, A., Yu, Y., Jiang, D., Vidolov, B., Sajda, P., Efroni, Y., and Hassani, K. Self-improvement of language models by post-training on multi-agent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.15172 ,2025. Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y., Wu, Y., et al. Deepseekmath: Push-ing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Sharma, M., Tong, M., Korbak, T., Duvenaud, D., Askell, A., Bowman, S. R., DURMUS, E., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Johnston, S. R., Kravec, S. M., et al. Towards under-standing sycophancy in language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Sheng, G., Zhang, C., Ye, Z., Wu, X., Zhang, W., Zhang, R., Peng, Y., Lin, H., and Wu, C. Hybridflow: A flexi-ble and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256 , 2024. Smit, A., Duckworth, P., Grinsztajn, N., Barrett, T. D., and Pretorius, A. Should we be going mad? a look at multi-agent debate strategies for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17371 , 2023. Subramaniam, V., Du, Y., Tenenbaum, J. B., Torralba, A., Li, S., and Mordatch, I. Multiagent finetuning: Self im-provement with diverse reasoning chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05707 , 2025. Sun, Y., Zhao, Z., Wan, S., and Gong, C. Cortexdebate: Debating sparsely and equally for multi-agent debate. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2025 , pp. 9503–9523, 2025. Tomov, T., Fuchsgruber, D., Wollschläger, T., and Günne-mann, S. Entropy is not enough: Uncertainty quantifica-tion for llms fails under aleatoric uncertainty. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference &

Generative Modeling , 2025. Wan, Z., Li, Y., Song, Y., Wang, H., Yang, L., Schmidt, M., Wang, J., Zhang, W., Hu, S., and Wen, Y. Rema: Learning to meta-think for llms with multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09501 , 2025. Wang, K., Moktar, S. A., Li, J., Li, K., and Chen, F. Mea-suring aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in llms: Em-pirical evaluation on id and ood qa tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03166 , 2025. 12 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Wang, Q., Wang, Z., Su, Y., Tong, H., and Song, Y. Re-thinking the bounds of llm reasoning: Are multi-agent discussions the key? In 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024 , pp. 6106–6131. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q. V., Chi, E. H., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in lan-guage models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. Wei, Y., Duchenne, O., Copet, J., Carbonneaux, Q., Zhang, L., Fried, D., Synnaeve, G., Singh, R., and Wang, S. I. Swe-rl: Advancing llm reasoning via reinforcement learning on open software evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18449 , 2025. Wynn, A., Satija, H., and Hadfield, G. Talk isn’t always cheap: Understanding failure modes in multi-agent de-bate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05396 , 2025. Xie, C., Pan, R., Wu, X., Zhang, Y., Fu, J., Gao, T., and Zhou, G. Unlocking exploration in rlvr: Uncertainty-aware advantage shaping for deeper reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10649 , 2025. Xie, S. M., Raghunathan, A., Liang, P., and Ma, T. An explanation of in-context learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080 , 2021. Yang, A., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Gao, B., Yu, B., Li, C., Liu, D., Tu, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., et al. Qwen2. 5-math techni-cal report: Toward mathematical expert model via self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12122 , 2024a. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025a. Yang, R., Rajagopal, D., Hayati, S. A., Hu, B., and Kang, D. Confidence calibration and rationalization for llms via multi-agent deliberation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09127 , 2024b. Yang, W. and Thomason, J. Learning to deliberate: Meta-policy collaboration for agentic llms with multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.03817 ,2025. Yang, Y., Yi, E., Ko, J., Lee, K., Jin, Z., and Yun, S.-Y. Revisiting multi-agent debate as test-time scaling: A sys-tematic study of conditional effectiveness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22960 , 2025b. Yang, Y., Qu, C., Wen, M., Shi, L., Wen, Y., Zhang, W., Wierman, A., and Gu, S. Understanding agent scaling in llm-based multi-agent systems via diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03794 , 2026. Yao, B., Shang, C., Du, W., He, J., Lian, R., Zhang, Y., Su, H., Swamy, S., and Qi, Y. Peacemaker or trou-blemaker: How sycophancy shapes multi-agent debate. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23055 , 2025. Yoffe, L., Amayuelas, A., and Wang, W. Y. Debunc: Im-proving large language model agent communication with uncertainty metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06426 ,2024. Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooper-ative multi-agent games. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24611–24624, 2022. Yu, Q., Zhang, Z., Zhu, R., Yuan, Y., Zuo, X., Yue, Y., Dai, W., Fan, T., Liu, G., Liu, L., et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476 , 2025. Zhang, H., Cui, Z., Wang, X., Zhang, Q., Wang, Z., Wu, D., and Hu, S. If multi-agent debate is the answer, what is the question. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08788 , 2025a. Zhang, K., Tian, K., Liu, R., Zeng, S., Zhu, X., Jia, G., Fan, Y., Lv, X., Zuo, Y., Jiang, C., et al. Marti: A framework for multi-agent llm systems reinforced training and in-ference. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025b. Zhang, S. and Xiong, D. Debate4math: Multi-agent debate for fine-grained reasoning in math. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pp. 16810–16824, 2025. Zhao, Y., Hu, L., Wang, Y., Hou, M., Zhang, H., Ding, K., and Zhao, J. Stronger-mas: Multi-agent reinforce-ment learning for collaborative llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11062 , 2025. Zhu, L., Wang, X., and Wang, X. Judgelm: Fine-tuned large language models are scalable judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17631 , 2023. Zhu, X., Zhang, C., Chi, Y., Stafford, T., Collier, N., and Vlachos, A. Demystifying multi-agent debate: The role of confidence and diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.19921 , 2026. 13 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

# A. Theoretical Analysis 

A.1. Proof of Lemma 3.1 (Noisy-evidence Log-odds Update) Lemma Statement. Assume p(h | x, c ⊕ m) = p(h | x, c, m ) and p(m | x, c ) > 0. Then: 

log p(h = 1 | x, c ⊕ m)

p(h = 0 | x, c ⊕ m) = log p(h = 1 | x, c )

p(h = 0 | x, c ) + log p(m | h = 1 , x, c )

p(m | h = 0 , x, c ) .

Proof. Recall Bayes’ theorem: 

p(h | x, c, m ) = p(m | h, x, c ) · p(h | x, c )

p(m | x, c ) . (6) Writing this for h = 1 and h = 0 separately: 

p(h = 1 | x, c, m ) = p(m | h = 1 , x, c ) · p(h = 1 | x, c )

p(m | x, c ) , (7) 

p(h = 0 | x, c, m ) = p(m | h = 0 , x, c ) · p(h = 0 | x, c )

p(m | x, c ) . (8) Dividing the first equation by the second cancels out the marginal likelihood p(m | x, c ):

p(h = 1 | x, c, m )

p(h = 0 | x, c, m ) = p(h = 1 | x, c )

p(h = 0 | x, c ) · p(m | h = 1 , x, c )

p(m | h = 0 , x, c ) . (9) Taking the natural logarithm on both sides yields the additive log-odds update: 

log p(h = 1 | x, c ⊕ m)

p(h = 0 | x, c ⊕ m) = log p(h = 1 | x, c )

p(h = 0 | x, c ) + log p(m | h = 1 , x, c )

p(m | h = 0 , x, c ) . (10) This concludes the proof. 

A.2. Proof of Proposition 3.2 (System-level Decomposition) Proposition Statement. Let TU( t) := H(¯ pt). Then TU( t) = Sys -EU( t) + Sys -Cost( t), where Sys -EU( t) = JSD( p1,t , . . . , p N,t ) and Sys -Cost( t) = 1

> N

P 

> i

H(pi,t ).Proof. This follows directly from the definition of the Generalized Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD). For a set of distributions {p1, . . . , p N } and weights π1 = · · · = πN = 1 

> N

, the JSD is defined as: 

JSD( p1, . . . , p N ) := H

> N

X

> i=1

πipi

!

−

> N

X

> i=1

πiH(pi). (11) Substituting our notation ¯pt = 1

> N

P 

> i

pi,t :

Sys -EU( t) = H(¯ pt) − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

H(pi,t ). (12) Rearranging the terms: 

H(¯ pt) = Sys -EU( t) + 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

H(pi,t ). (13) By definition, TU( t) = H(¯ pt) and Sys -Cost( t) = 1

> N

P 

> i

H(pi,t ), which proves the identity. 14 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

A.3. Proof of Theorem 3.3 (Heterogeneous Epistemic Gain) Theorem Statement. If I(φ; mhetero | x, c, m homo ) ≥ I(φ; m′ 

> homo

| x, c, m homo ), then Gepi (mhetero ) ≥ Gepi (mhomo ).Proof. We analyze the epistemic gain Gepi (m) := I(φ; m | x, c ). We consider the scenario where the agent has already internally generated (or has access to) a homogeneous-type response mhomo . Using the chain rule of mutual information, the joint information provided by two messages m1, m 2 is: 

I(φ; m1, m 2 | x, c ) = I(φ; m1 | x, c ) + I(φ; m2 | x, c, m 1). (14) 

Case 1: Homogeneous Pair ( A, A ′). Let m1 = mhomo and m2 = m′ 

> homo

(an independent sample from the same distribution). 

Ihomo total = I(φ; mhomo | x, c ) + I(φ; m′ 

> homo

| x, c, m homo ). (15) 

Case 2: Heterogeneous Pair ( A, B ). Let m1 = mhomo and m2 = mhetero .

Ihetero total = I(φ; mhomo | x, c ) + I(φ; mhetero | x, c, m homo ). (16) Subtracting the two equations: 

Ihetero total − Ihomo total = I(φ; mhetero | . . . ) − I(φ; m′ 

> homo

| . . . ). (17) Under the heterogeneous novelty condition assumed in the theorem (that the heterogeneous message provides more conditional information given the homogeneous baseline), the RHS is non-negative. Thus, the total information gain (and consequently the reduction in epistemic uncertainty) is greater in the heterogeneous setting. 

# B. Algorithms and Pseudocode 

B.1. Uncertainty Quantification of Multi Agent Debate 

In the context of multi-agent debate, standard step-level branching leads to a combinatorial explosion of interaction paths—a computational bottleneck highlighted by (Feng et al., 2025a). To mitigate this, we adopt a ’Trajectory-level Pairwise Debate Rollouts’ strategy that maintains K parallel debate histories as shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, at the initial turn (t = 0 ), each participating agent generates K = 16 independent rollouts. These responses are then synchronized by index to form K distinct conversation threads (i.e., the k-th response of Agent A is paired with the k-th response of Agent B). For all subsequent turns ( t > 0), agents generate a single rollout K = 1 for each of these established trajectories. This mechanism ensures that each of the K trajectories evolves linearly with consistent context, enabling efficient GRPO without the exponential overhead of recursive branching. Then we utilize these K parallel debate rollouts to approximate the implicit belief distribution by aggregating the frequency of final answers. To ensure robustness, we extract the answer key from each rollout and merge semantically equivalent terms. Crucially, to enable valid divergence calculations across agents who may sample disjoint answer sets, we define the common support set Yunion as the union of all unique answers generated by the entire team at turn t. Each agent i’s empirical distribution ˆpi, t (y) is then computed over this global support Yunion , assigning zero probability to unobserved outcomes. Based on these aligned distributions, we quantify the uncertainty using the team’s mean distribution ¯pt(y) = 

> 1
> N

PNi=1 ˆpi, t (y). Specifically, the Total Uncertainty is defined as the entropy of the team mean H(¯ pt). This is further decomposed into Epistemic Uncertainty , and Aleatoric Uncertainty , measured by the Jensen-Shannon Divergence among agents and the average entropy of individual distributions. The pseudo-code is demonstrated in Table 1. 

B.2. UMAD Training Algorithm 

Algorithm 2 presents the Uncertainty-Guided Multi-Agent Debate (UMAD) training framework, which extends GRPO to optimize collaborative reasoning. The procedure involves sampling a group of joint debate trajectories to estimate advantage baselines, incorporating two key regulatory mechanisms: an Epistemic Influence Intrinsic Reward that credits agents for positively shaping peer performance in subsequent turns, and an Aleatoric Uncertainty-Aware Advantage that modulates gradient updates based on token-level confidence. By integrating these components, the algorithm optimizes the policy to minimize internal reasoning noise while maximizing the effective information gain provided to the multi-agent system. 15 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Figure 4. Trajectory-level pairwise debate rollouts strategy. 

Algorithm 1 MAD Uncertainty Quantification 

1: Input: Problems Dataset D, Agents {πθi }Ni=1 , Max Turns T , Sample Count K = 16 

2: for each problem x in D do 

3: Initialize contexts ci, 0 ← ∅ for all i

4: for turn t = 1 to T do 

5: // Step 1: Estimate Uncertainty via Sampling 

6: for agent i = 1 to N do 

7: Generate K sample paths: {y(k) 

> i,t

}Kk=1 ∼ πθi (· | x, c i,t −1)

8: Extract answers and estimate distribution pi,t (y) based on count frequencies 

9: Calculate Agent Aleatoric Entropy: U ale i,t = H(pi,t )

10: end for 

11: // Step 2: Calculate System Uncertainty Metrics (Eq. 3) 

12: Calculate Mixture Distribution: psys (y) = 1

> N

PNi=1 pi,t (y)

13: System TU: TU t = H(psys )

14: System AU: Sys -AU t = 1

> N

PNi=1 U ale i,t 

15: System EU (JSD): Sys -EU t = TU t − Sys -AU t

16: // Step 3: Proceed to Next Round (Single Trajectory) 

17: for agent i = 1 to N do 

18: Sample a single response ˆyi,t ∼ πθi (· | x, c i,t −1) // or select greedily 

19: end for 

20: Update Context: ci,t ← Φi({ˆyj,t }Nj=1 )

21: end for 

22: end for 

# C. Experiment Details 

C.1. Datasets MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021): The MATH dataset contains 12,500 challenging competition mathematics problems including algebra, geometry, combinatorics, and number theory. Each problem is provided with a full step-by-step solution with multi-step reasoning process. 

GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021): GSM8K contains 8,500 grade-school-level word problems focusing on arithmetic and logical reasoning. 

AMC-23 (Knovel Engineering, 2025): This dataset contains 40 expert mathematical problems drawn from the 2023 American Mathematics Competitions, including spanning algebra, combinatorics, geometry, and number theory. 

AIME24 (25) (Art of Problem Solving, 2024; 2025): Each dataset contains 30 competition-level problems from the American Invitational Mathematics Examination I and II tests. 16 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Algorithm 2 Uncertainty-Guided Multi-Agent Debate Training (UMAD)  

> 1:

Input: Dataset D, Policy πθ , Ref Model πref , Learning Rate α, Group Size G, Debate Turns Ttrain  

> 2:

Hyperparams: KL coeff β, Epistemic Reward weight η 

> 3:

while not converged do  

> 4:

Sample batch of questions x ∼ D  

> 5:

for each x do  

> 6:

// Collect Trajectories via Debate Rollout  

> 7:

for group rollout g = 1 to G do  

> 8:

Initialize ci, 0 = ∅ 

> 9:

for turn t = 1 to Ttrain do  

> 10:

for agent i = 1 to N do  

> 11:

Sample response yi,t ∼ πθ (· | x, c i,t −1) 

> 12:

Compute token-level log-probs for ˆUi 

> 13:

Verify correctness Rcorr (yi,t , y ∗) ∈ { 0, 1} 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Update Context ct with peer responses  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

// Compute Rewards and Advantages  

> 19:

for each response (yi,t ) in batch do  

> 20:

1. Calculate Epistemic Intrinsic Reward  

> 21:

Calculate Mean Peer Improvement ∆Rpeer based on next turn correctness  

> 22:

Total Reward Rtotal = Rcorr + η · ∆Rpeer (if t < T train ) 

> 23:

2. Compute Group Advantage  

> 24:

Ai,t = Rtotal −mean (Rgroup ) 

> std (Rgroup )+ ϵ
> 25:

3. Apply Aleatoric Uncertainty Weighting  

> 26:

Aau i,t = W ( ˆUi) · Ai,t  

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

// GRPO Update  

> 29:

L = E [min( rA au , clip (r)Aau ) − βD KL (πθ ∥πref )]  

> 30:

Update θ ← θ − α∇θ L 

> 31:

end for  

> 32:

end while C.2. LLM Configurations and Hyperparameters 

We implement our Uncertainty-Guided Multi-Agent Debate (UMAD) training based on the Group Relative Policy Optimiza-tion (GRPO) framework (Shao et al., 2024). The training is conducted using PyTorch with the veRL (Sheng et al., 2024) on 

8× NVIDIA H800 GPUs. The detailed hyperparameters for generation, optimization, and the GRPO algorithm are listed in Table 2. 

Reward Configuration. For the correctness reward, we assign +1 for the correct final answer and 0 otherwise. The Epistemic Influence intrinsic reward is controlled by reu i,t = 0 .25 to balance the trade-off between self-correctness and peer-persuasion. The exact match is determined using the rigorous equivalence reward script provided by the MATH dataset benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021). 

Prompt Formatting. We adopt the standard chat template of math reasoning problems. The debate context from previous rounds is appended to the user message history to ensure the model attends to the peer’s reasoning paths. The detailed prompt templates are demonstrated in Section D. 

C.3. Debate Configurations 

In this paper, we set each agent’s response length as 2048 and prompt length as 5120. Based on grid search of MAD with different length settings, we found that 2048 is enough for handling most questions with debate contexts, the accuracy of 17 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning                        

> Table 2. Detailed Hyperparameters for UMAD Training and Inference.
> Hyperparameter Value
> Generation Configuration
> Training Temperature 0.8
> Inference Temperature 0.6
> Top-p 0.95
> Max Response Length 2048
> Max Prompt Length 5120
> Optimizer Configuration
> Optimizer Adam Learning Rate 1×10 −6
> Weight Decay 0.01
> Gradient Clipping Norm 1.0
> Clip Ratio 0.2
> GRPO Training Configuration
> Training Epochs 2
> Train Batch Size 256
> Training Debate Rounds ( Ttrain )2
> Evaluation Debate Rounds ( Ttest )5
> Group Size ( G)5
> KL Coefficient ( β)0.001
> Epistemic Influence Intrinsic Rewards ( reu i,t )0.25
> Aleatoric Uncertainty Advantage Ratio ( αau )0.25

general setting as 8k or 32k is marginally above the 2k setting. Considering the computational cost, we set 2k as default settings for both training and evaluation periods. 

C.4. Dynamics of Answer Flipping 

To study how agents navigate increased uncertainty, we analyze answer changes (flipping) from the initial response to the first debate round. We partition outcomes into four transitions: Correct-to-Correct (C2C) , Correct-to-Wrong (C2W) ,

Wrong-to-Correct (W2C) , and Wrong-to-Wrong (W2W) . The Flip Ratio is defined as the proportion of responses that change their binary correctness state between the two rounds (i.e., C → W and W → C). This statistic is widely used in prior debate analyses to quantify stability and susceptibility to peer influence; our definition aligns with those conventions to ensure direct comparability. Figure 5 demonstrates first-round flip ratios for homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs. First, flip ratios are lower for stronger models and higher for weaker models, mirroring the stability differences reported in prior debate studies. Second, heterogeneous pairs exhibit intermediate flip ratios relative to their homogeneous baselines. These observations align with our uncertainty framework: higher flip ratios coincide with higher predictive uncertainty, while lower flip ratios reflect more concentrated beliefs. 

C.5. System-level Uncertainty Decomposition Results 

To validate our framework, we conducted experiments across seven models from the Qwen2.5, Qwen3, and Llama families, forming diverse homogeneous and heterogeneous configurations. All debates were conducted on the MATH dataset with N = 2 agents for T = 5 rounds. Crucially, to bridge the gap between theoretical Bayesian beliefs and empirical measurement, we set the sampling temperature to 1.0 and generated K = 16 sample paths for each agent at every turn. This allows us to explicitly compute the System Total Uncertainty and decompose it into Epistemic Uncertainty (JSD, representing inter-agent conflict) and Aleatoric Uncertainty (Mean Entropy, representing intra-agent instability). 

Analysis of Debate Trajectories. As illustrated in Fig. 6, our empirical findings reveal that the outcome of a debate is governed by a delicate trade-off between epistemic resolution and aleatoric control: • Universal Consensus (Epistemic Decay): A universal trend across all Successful, Neutral, and Failure trajectories 18 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning  

> Figure 5. Homogeneous and Heterogeneous First Turn Responses Flipping Ratio.

is the monotonic decrease of Epistemic Uncertainty (EU). This confirms that MAD fundamentally functions as a consensus-seeking process regardless of ground-truth correctness, continuously pruning conflicting hypotheses. • The "Aleatoric Barrier" to Success: The divergence in final accuracy is primarily dictated by Aleatoric Uncertainty (AU). 

– Success Mode: Agents maintain low or decreasing AU, effectively anchoring valid reasoning against noise. 

– Failure Mode: Often observed in weaker models (e.g., Llama series), AU escalates uncontrollably. This indicates that the "contextual cost"—such as hallucination reinforcement—overwhelms the benefits of information exchange. 

– Neutral Mode: Represents an equilibrium where epistemic gains are exactly offset by high aleatoric noise, leading to stagnant accuracy. • The Heterogeneous Advantage: Heterogeneous pairs (e.g., Qwen-3B vs. Qwen-4B) exhibit significantly higher initial EU than homogeneous ones. This elevated "cognitive gap" offers greater potential for improvement. Optimal performance is achieved when this high epistemic potential is realized under the stability constraints provided by the stronger model, maximizing effective information gain. 19 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

(a) Success Homogeneous MAD (b) Neutral Homogeneous MAD (c) Fail Homogeneous MAD 

(d) Success Homogeneous MAD (e) Neutral Homogeneous MAD (f) Success Homogeneous MAD 

(g) Success Heterogeneous MAD (h) Neutral Heterogeneous MAD (i) Fail Heterogeneous MAD 

(j) Success Heterogeneous MAD (k) Success Heterogeneous MAD (l) Success Heterogeneous MAD 

Figure 6. Overview of uncertainty decomposition in MAD. The purple dashed area represents the system epistemic uncertainty and the gray line represents the total uncertainty. The blue and orange lines represent the accuracy on the test datasets. Top two row: 

Homogeneous multi agent debate. Bottom two row: Heterogeneous multi agent debate. 

20 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

# D. Example Prompts 

In this section, we provide the prompts used in multi-agent debate process, which are uniformly used for all training datasets and evaluation datasets in math reasoning problems. 

D.1. Agent Prompt for Initial Turn 0 

In the first round, each agent is provided with the question texts and the standard step-by-step reasoning instructions. The final results are concluded with the format string \boxed{} .

system (Could be changed according to specific models system instructions.) You are Qwen, created by Alibaba Cloud. You are a helpful assistant. 

user 

[Question Texts] Let’s think step by step and output the final answer within \boxed{}. 

D.2. Agent Prompt for Debate Turns 

In the following turns, each agent receives the responses of all agents in the last turn as additional reference solutions. All agents’ solutions are provided anonymously without specific agent id and meaningful roles. This yields a standardized debate setting that avoids role-specific or privileged information and keeps the process grounded in the original task and reference solutions. Instruction prompts encourage agents to refine the reference solutions without imposing a fixed reflection style. 

system (Could be changed according to specific models’ system instructions.) You are Qwen, created by Alibaba Cloud. You are a helpful assistant. 

user 

Given the following problem: [Question Texts]. We have two answers: 

agent 0 response is: [Agent 0 reasoning and answer]. 

agent 1 response is: [Agent 1 reasoning and answer]. Please carefully review these answers and recognize which one is right. If one or all of them are right, please summarize the reasoning process of the right one and give the final answer. If both of them are wrong, please correct their mistakes and provide a novel and complete solution to the problem and give the final answer. Let’s think step by step and output the final answer within \boxed{}. 

# E. Multi-Agent Debate Examples 

In this section, we present two typical examples of debate dialogues to illustrate the failure cases of homogeneous debate and the successful cases of heterogeneous models. Considering that excessively long debate logs are difficult to read, we have simplified the original responses to highlight the key changes brought about by the debate. 

E.1. Homogeneous Failure Debate Examples 

This problem vividly illustrates the failure of isomorphic debate to reduce epistemic uncertainty. Although Agent 1 initially derived the correct solution ( 3/8), it succumbed to blind conformity during the debate, abandoning its valid reasoning to align with Agent 0’s flawed geometric logic ( 64 /343 ). This regression demonstrates that without the differential verification capabilities provided by heterogeneous models, isomorphic agents often treat consensus as a proxy for truth, leading to the active elimination of correct answers in favor of shared hallucinations. 21 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

# Case 1: Corret to Both Wrong 

Question: A sphere is inscribed in a cone with height 4 and base radius 3. What is the ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone? 

[asy] fill(circle((1.5,0),1.5),gray(.7)); draw((0,3)--(4,0)--(0,-3)); draw(circle((1.5,0),1.5)); draw((0,0)..(1.5,-.3)..(3,0)); draw((0,0)..(1.5,.3)..(3,0),dashed); draw(xscale(.15)*circle((0,0),3)); [/asy] 

Let’s think step by step and output the final answer within .

The Ground Truth: 38

Turn 0 Agent 0 Response: 

To find the ratio of the volume of the inscribed sphere to the volume of the cone, we need to determine the radius of the sphere and the volume of the cone first. Step 1: Determine the radius of the sphere Let the radius of the sphere be r. The cone has a height of 4 and a base radius of 3. The radius of the sphere, the radius of the base of the cone, and the distance from the center of the sphere to the base of the cone form a right triangle. The distance from the center of the sphere to the base of the cone is 4 − r.Using the similar triangles property, the ratio of the radius of the base of the cone to the height of the cone is equal to the ratio of the radius of the sphere to the distance from the center of the sphere to the base of the cone: 

34 = r

4 − r

Cross-multiplying gives: 

3(4 − r) = 4 r =⇒ 12 − 3r = 4 r =⇒ 12 = 7 r =⇒ r = 12 7

Step 2: Determine the volume of the sphere The volume Vsphere of a sphere is given by: 

Vsphere = 43 πr 3 = 43 π

 12 7

3

= 43 π 1728 343 = 2304 π

1029 

Step 3: Determine the volume of the cone The volume Vcone of a cone is given by: 

Vcone = 13 πR 2h = 13 π(3) 2(4) = 13 π · 9 · 4 = 12 π

Step 4: Determine the ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone 

22 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

The ratio Vsphere  

> Vcone

is: 

Vsphere 

Vcone 

=

> 2304 π
> 1029

12 π = 2304 1029 · 12 = 2304 12348 = 192 1029 = 64 343 

Thus, the ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone is: 

64 343 

Turn 0 Agent 1 Response: 

To find the ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone, we need to determine the radius of the sphere and the volume of both the sphere and the cone. First, let’s denote the radius of the sphere by r. The radius of the base of the cone is 3, and the height of the cone is 4. The sphere is inscribed in the cone, meaning it touches the base of the cone and the lateral surface of the cone. Consider a vertical cross-section of the cone through its axis. This cross-section is an isosceles triangle with a height of 4 and a base of 6 (since the diameter of the base of the cone is 6). The inscribed sphere touches the base of the cone and the lateral surface at a distance r from the center of the base of the cone. The radius of the sphere is perpendicular to the base and touches the slant height of the cone at a distance r from the center of the base. The triangle formed by the height of the cone, the radius of the base, and the slant height is similar to the triangle formed by the height of the cone minus the radius of the sphere, the radius of the base minus the radius of the sphere, and the slant height minus the radius of the sphere. The ratio of the corresponding sides of these similar triangles is the same. The radius of the sphere r can be found using the formula for the radius of an inscribed sphere in a cone: 

r = rbase · hcone 

pr2 

> base

+ h2 

> cone

+ rbase 

where rbase = 3 and hcone = 4 . Plugging in these values, we get: 

r = 3 · 4

√32 + 4 2 + 3 = 12 

√25 + 3 = 12 5 + 3 = 12 8 = 32

Now we have the radius of the sphere r = 32 . The volume of the sphere is given by: 

Vsphere = 43 πr 3 = 43 π

 32

3

= 43 π · 27 8 = 9π

2

Next, we calculate the volume of the cone. The volume of a cone is given by: 

Vcone = 13 πr 2

> base

hcone = 13 π(3) 2(4) = 13 π · 9 · 4 = 12 π

The ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone is: Ratio = Vsphere 

Vcone 

=

> 9π
> 2

12 π = 9π

2 · 112 π = 924 = 38

Thus, the ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone is 38 .

23 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Turn 1 Agent 0 Response: 

Corrected Analysis and Solution: Let’s correct the analysis: 1. Radius of the Sphere: The correct radius r of the inscribed sphere is derived from the similar triangles property. The ratio of the radius of the base to the height of the cone is equal to the ratio of the radius of the sphere to the distance from the center of the sphere to the base of the cone. We have: 

34 = r

4 − r

Solving this, we get: 

3(4 − r) = 4 r =⇒ 12 − 3r = 4 r =⇒ 12 = 7 r =⇒ r = 12 7

2. Volume of the Sphere: The volume Vsphere of the sphere is: 

Vsphere = 43 πr 3 = 43 π

 12 7

3

= 43 π 1728 343 = 2304 π

1029 

3. Volume of the Cone: The volume Vcone of the cone is: 

Vcone = 13 πR 2h = 13 π(3) 2(4) = 13 π · 9 · 4 = 12 π

4. Ratio of the Volume of the Sphere to the Volume of the Cone: The ratio Vsphere  

> Vcone

is: 

Vsphere 

Vcone 

=

> 2304 π
> 1029

12 π = 2304 1029 · 12 = 2304 12348 = 192 1029 = 64 343 

Conclusion: The ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone is: 

64 343 

Turn 1 Agent 1 Response: 

Let’s summarize and correct the reasoning process to find the correct ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone. Corrected Reasoning: 1. Radius of the Sphere Calculation: - The cone has a height of 4 and a base radius of 3. The radius of the sphere, 

r, is the radius of the inscribed sphere. - The distance from the center of the sphere to the base of the cone is 4 − r.- Using the similar triangles property, we have: 

34 = r

4 − r

- Cross-multiplying gives: 

3(4 − r) = 4 r =⇒ 12 − 3r = 4 r =⇒ 12 = 7 r =⇒ r = 12 7

24 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

2. Volume of the Sphere: - The volume of the sphere is given by: 

Vsphere = 43 πr 3 = 43 π

 12 7

3

= 43 π 1728 343 = 2304 π

1029 

3. Volume of the Cone: - The volume of the cone is given by: 

Vcone = 13 πR 2h = 13 π(3) 2(4) = 13 π · 9 · 4 = 12 π

4. Ratio of Volumes: - The ratio of the volume of the sphere to the volume of the cone is: 

Vsphere 

Vcone 

=

> 2304 π
> 1029

12 π = 2304 1029 · 12 = 2304 12348 = 192 1029 = 64 343 

Final Answer: 

64 343 

E.2. Heterogeneous Success Debate Examples 

The debate illustrates a successful transition from heuristic approximation to algebraic rigor: while Agent 0 initially erred due to the precision limits of numerical estimation, the cross-agent critique allowed it to identify the instability of its approach and adopt Agent 1’s superior conjugate-symmetry method. This process highlights how the multi-agent debate mechanism effectively mitigates "approximation traps," prompting a logical self-correction that results in a mathematically rigorous convergence at 13535. 

# Wrong to Both Correct 

Question: Find the greatest integer less than (√7 + √5) 6.Let’s think step by step and output the final answer within .

The Ground Truth: 13535 

Turn 0 Agent 0 Response: (The original log has been simplified.) 

Step 1: Expands directly x6 = 6768 + 1144 √35 .Step 2: Approximates √35 ≈ 5.916 , yielding x6 ≈ 13537 .664 .Conclusion: ⌊x6⌋ = 13537 .

Turn 0 Agent 1 Response: (The original log has been simplified.) 

Step 1: Uses the conjugate method. Let y = ( √7 − √5) 6.Step 2: Notes 0 < y < 1. The sum S = x6 + y6 must be an integer. Step 3: Derives recurrence un = 24 un−2 − 4un−4 to find S = 13536 .Conclusion: Since x6 = 13536 − y, the floor must be 13536 − 1 = 13535 .25 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

Turn 1 Agent 0 Response: 

The correct greatest integer less than (√7 + √5) 6 is 13535 .The reasoning and calculations provided initially led to an accurate final answer of 13536, but after considering the nature of the problem and the constraints, we recognize that the greatest integer less than (√7 + √5) 6 is indeed 13535. 

Turn 1 Agent 1 Response: 

We are asked to find the greatest integer less than (√7 + √5) 6, i.e., 

j

(√7 + √5) 6k

We are to do this without a calculator. Evaluation of the Two Responses: Agent 0’s Response: Incorrect. Agent 0 computes (√7 + √5) 6 directly and approximates √35 ≈ 5.916 , leading to: 

x6 ≈ 6768 + 1144 · 5.916 ≈ 13537 .664 

This suggests the floor is 13537 , but this is wrong because: • The expansion does not account for the conjugate symmetry. • The approximation is not justified without a calculator. • The critical flaw is that this approach does not guarantee the floor function accuracy. Agent 1’s Response: Correct. Agent 1 uses the conjugate method with symmetry: Let: 

x = ( √7 + √5) 6, y = ( √7 − √5) 6

Then x + y = S is an integer, and 0 < y < 1, so: 

x = S − y =⇒ ⌊ x⌋ = S − 1

Using recurrence un = 24 un−2 − 4un−4:• u0 = 2 

• u2 = 24 

• u4 = 568 

• u6 = 13536 

Then: 

⌊x⌋ = 13536 − 1 = 13535 

Final Answer: 

13535 

Summary of Correct Reasoning: We use the identity: (√7 + √5) 6 + ( √7 − √5) 6 is an integer because the irrational parts cancel. Since 0 < (√7 − √5) 6 < 1, the original expression is just less than this integer. Therefore, the floor is one less than that integer. We compute the sum using recurrence derived from the minimal polynomial, obtaining u6 = 13536 . Thus: (√7 + √5) 6 = 13536 − 1 = 13535 

26 Epistemic Gain, Aleatoric Cost: Uncertainty Decomposition in Multi-Agent Debate for Math Reasoning 

# F. Broader Impact 

This work advances the understanding of multi-agent interactions in Large Language Models (LLMs) by providing a rigorous Bayesian framework for uncertainty quantification. By shifting the focus from superficial prompt engineering to the fundamental regulation of internal belief dynamics, our Uncertainty-Guided MARL (UMAD) approach paves the way for more reliable and self-correcting reasoning systems. This has broader implications for deploying LLMs in high-stakes domains (e.g., scientific research, legal analysis) where hallucinations are notoriously risky and "wisdom of crowds" mechanisms are essential for verification. 

# G. Computational Resources 

All experiments were conducted on a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster. The primary hardware configuration consisted of a single node equipped with 8× NVIDIA H800 (80GB) GPUs. The total computational expenditure is summarized as follows: • Inference & Evaluation: Multi-agent debate evaluation, incorporating aleatoric uncertainty estimation with a sampling scale of K = 16 , required approximately 40 GPU-hours. • UMAD Training: The Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) training phase for models ranging from 3B to 7B parameters, with a rollout group size of G = 16 , consumed between 200 and 300 GPU-hours, depending on the specific model scale and context length. 

# H. Declarations on Generative AI 

In the preparation of this manuscript, generative AI tools were utilized solely for language polishing, including improvements to grammar, clarity, and overall stylistic presentation. All models employed in our experiments are strictly compliant with their respective open-source licenses, and all training and evaluation data were sourced from publicly available datasets, ensuring reproducibility and adherence to ethical data usage standards. 

# I. Acknowledgement 

The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to Youliang Yuan, Yajiao Liu, Fei Yu, Xiaoyuan Liu, Jiawei Xu, Yue Lin, Han Wang, Ang Li, Zhongxiang Dai, and Zhiwei Shang from the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHKSZ) for their insightful discussions and support. We also thank Lihu Chen (Imperial College London) for his valuable feedbacks during the development of this work. 27