Title: Bridging MARL to SARL: An Order-Independent Multi-Agent Transformer via Latent Consensus

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13472v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:33:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Bridging MARL to SARL: An Order-Independent Multi-Agent Transformer via Latent Consensus 

Zijian Zhao 

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology ∗

Jing Gao 

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

Sen Li 

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

# Abstract 

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is widely used to address large joint observation and action spaces by decomposing a centralized control problem into multiple interacting agents. However, such decomposition often introduces additional challenges, including non-stationarity, unstable training, weak coordination, and limited theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we propose the Consensus Multi-Agent Transformer (CMAT), a centralized framework that bridges cooperative MARL to a hierarchical single-agent reinforcement learning (SARL) formulation. CMAT treats all agents as a unified entity and employs a Transformer encoder to process the large joint observation space. To handle the extensive joint action space, we introduce a hierarchical decision-making mechanism in which a Transformer decoder autoregressively generates a high-level consensus vector, simulating the process by which agents reach agreement on their strategies in latent space. Conditioned on this consensus, all agents generate their actions simultaneously, enabling order-independent joint decision making and avoiding the sensitivity to action-generation order in conventional Multi-Agent Transformers (MAT). This factorization allows the joint policy to be optimized using single-agent PPO while preserving expressive coordination through the latent consensus. To evaluate the proposed method, we conduct experiments on benchmark tasks from StarCraft II, Multi-Agent MuJoCo, and Google Research Football. The results show that CMAT achieves superior performance over recent centralized solutions, sequential MARL methods, and conventional MARL baselines. The code for this paper is available at: https://github.com/RS2002/CMAT .

# 1 Introduction 

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has become an important framework for solving complex real-world problems such as autonomous fleet coordination, traffic signal optimization, and robotic swarm control. In many of these settings, fully centralized control is feasible and sometimes even necessary; for example, ride-hailing order dispatch often requires global coordination to avoid redundant assignments. However, the joint observation and action spaces typically grow exponentially with the number of agents, giving rise to the Curse of Dimensionality 

> ∗

Corresponding Author: Jing Gao Preprint. 

> arXiv:2604.13472v1 [cs.LG] 15 Apr 2026

Figure 1: Comparison between CMAT and Conventional Decentralized MARL Methods. (CoD) [ 1 ]. A common way to mitigate this issue is to decompose the original problem into multiple decentralized agents that learn collaboratively. Although this decomposition improves scalability, it also introduces substantial challenges, including non-stationarity, unstable training dynamics, and poor credit assignment, which can ultimately limit both empirical performance and theoretical guarantees [2]. A major line of research addresses these difficulties through the Centralized Training Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm. Representative methods such as QMIX [ 3], Mean Field MARL [ 4], and COMA [ 5] use a centralized critic to exploit global state information or neighborhood interactions during training, thereby alleviating instability and credit assignment issues. Nevertheless, under decentralized execution, agents still act independently, which restricts cooperation because each agent can only infer the behavior of others from past training experience. Similar limitations also arise in many implicit consensus-based MARL approaches [ 6]. More recently, explicit communication mechanisms have been explored [ 7], allowing agents to exchange information during both training and execution. While promising, these methods introduce additional design challenges, including how to choose communication partners and what information should be shared. Motivated by these limitations, another line of research has shifted toward fully centralized solu-tions, namely Centralized Training Centralized Execution (CTCE). Among these approaches, the Multi-Agent Transformer (MAT) [ 8 ] has emerged as a representative framework by formulating cooperative MARL as a sequential decision-making problem. Specifically, MAT employs a cen-tralized Transformer [ 9] encoder to capture relationships among all agents’ observations and uses a decoder to generate actions autoregressively. However, the resulting policy can be highly sensitive to the action-generation order. Although recent studies have attempted to optimize this order jointly with action selection [ 10 ; 11 ], doing so substantially increases the complexity of the problem by expanding the search space to n!, where n denotes the number of agents. In the same spirit, the recent Triple-BERT [ 12 ] explores an alternative direction by modeling joint action probabilities directly and simultaneously. However, this method relies on a structured policy space that may limit action expressiveness, making it primarily suitable for trip-vehicle assignment problems. To address these limitations, we propose the Consensus Multi-Agent Transformer (CMAT), which recasts cooperative MARL as a hierarchical Single-Agent Reinforcement Learning (SARL) problem. Building upon MAT, CMAT replaces sequential action generation with an iterative consensus-generation process in the decoder. This process simulates how agents reach agreement on their strategies in latent space, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Once the consensus vector is obtained, all agents generate their actions simultaneously while conditioning on this shared high-level strategy, allowing each agent to act with awareness of the strategies of the others. We model the joint action probability as the product of individual action probabilities conditioned on the consensus vector, which makes the overall framework amenable to optimization with single-agent Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 13 ]. We evaluate CMAT on a broad range of MARL benchmarks, including StarCraft II [14 ], Multi-Agent MuJoCo [ 15 ], and Google Research Football [ 16 ]. Experimental results show that CMAT consistently outperforms strong baselines, highlighting its potential as a new paradigm for fully observable cooperative MARL. 22 Preliminaries 

2.1 Problem Formulation 

We consider cooperative Markov games, represented by < N , O, A, R, P, γ > [ 17 ]. Here, N =

{1, 2, . . . , n } denotes the set of agents, O = {o1, o 2, . . . , o n} denotes the observation set of each agent, and A = {a1, a 2, . . . , a n} denotes the action set of the agents. The joint reward function is defined as R : O × A → R, and the transition function is given by P : O × A × O → R. The discount factor is denoted by γ ∈ [0 , 1) . We further denote the joint policy by π = {π1, π 2, . . . , π n}.At each time step t, all agents act simultaneously and receive a joint reward R( Ot, At), while the next observation Ot+1 is generated according to P( Ot+1 | O t, At). The objective is to maximize the long-term discounted cumulative reward, defined as J = P∞ 

> t=0

γtR( Ot, At), and the corresponding optimal policy is π∗ = arg max π J.In this paper, we focus on a fully cooperative and fully observable setting, where the observations and policies of all agents are available to one another. This assumption is equivalent to a centralized controller with complete information [ 8 ; 12 ], which is practical in many real-world applications such as ride-sharing, traffic signal control, and emergency dispatch. In addition, we consider a model-free setting, in which the transition function P is learned implicitly rather than modeled explicitly. Under this formulation, we define the value functions for single agent and agent set in Appendix B. 

2.2 Multi-Agent Transformer and Its Variants 

Figure 2: Payoff Matrix of Co-operative Game: The joint ac-tions (A, A ) and (B, B ) are both NE, while (B, B ) is the global optimum. 

Agent 1 A BAgent 2 A 1 -100 

> B

0 100 MAT [ 8] formulates the cooperative Markov game as a sequential model based on the Transformer architecture [ 9], with the goal of capturing action dependencies among agents. Specifically, it first employs an encoder to extract observation features for all agents, denoted by ˆO = {ˆo1, ˆo2, . . . , ˆon}, and predicts the V-value V(ˆ oi)

from each observation feature ˆoi. It then uses a decoder to generate agent actions sequentially , where self-attention captures inter-agent relationships and cross-attention models the dependence between actions and agents’ observations. For simplicity, we assume that the decision order proceeds from agent 1 to agent n, and we denote the parameters of the critic and actor by ϕ and θ, respectively. ( Note that 

ϕ and θ partially overlap. ) The loss functions can then be expressed as: 

LM AT Critic (ϕ) = Ei∈N ,t ∈T 

(R( Ot, At) + γVϕ− (ˆ oit+1 ) − Vϕ(ˆ oit)) 2 ,

LM AT Actor (θ) = Ei∈N ,t ∈T 

min  rit(θ)A( Ot, At), CLIP( rit(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)A( Ot, At) , (1) where ϕ− are the parameters of the target critic network, rit(θ) is defined as πiθ (ait|O t,a 1: i−1    

> t)
> πiθ−(ait|O t,a 1: i−1
> t)

, θ−

are the network parameters used for sample collection, and T is defined as {0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞} . The advantage function is estimated using Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [ 18 ] with the estimated V-value defined as Vϕ(Ot) = 1

> n

Pni=1 Vϕ(ˆ oit).Although MAT [ 8 ] has demonstrated promising performance when combined with Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposition [ 19 ; 20 ], which theoretically guarantees that this optimization scheme can improve the joint advantage, several studies [ 10 ; 11 ] have observed that the decision order of agents can substantially affect performance. A primary reason for this phenomenon lies in incorrect credit assignment induced by biased value-function estimation. In particular, for leading agents, the value estimation often fails to adequately capture the influence of subsequent agents. Given agent i, the real advantage function should be (derived from Eq. 13 and Eq. 14): 

Ai(O, a 1: i−1, a i) = Q 1: i(O, a 1: i) − Q1: i−1(O, a 1: i−1) ,

= Eˆai:n

Q( O, [a1: i, ˆai+1: n]) − Q( O, [a1: i−1, ˆai:n])  . (2) However, in the loss function defined in Eq. 1, Ai(O, a 1: i−1, a i) is replaced by A( O, A), thereby introducing the effects of subsequent agents’ actions into the credit assignment of leading agents. Conversely, for following agents, another inconsistency arises between the joint V-value V( O),which depends only on joint observations, and the actors’ behavior πi(O, a 1: i−1), which additionally 3conditions on the actions of preceding agents. Both issues can distort the optimization direction and ultimately hinder effective cooperation within the multi-agent system. To illustrate a failure scenario involving MAT, consider the cooperative game depicted in Fig. 2. This game consists of a single step where both agents have two possible actions. The values in the table represent the long-term team reward, with MAT following the decision order of Agent 1 leading to Agent 2. We assume that the initial V-value of all states is set to 0. If Agent 1 chooses action B and Agent 2 subsequently selects action A, this results in a substantial negative reward and advantage value of -100. As a consequence, the probabilities π1(a1 = B|O ) and π2(a2 = A|O , a 1 = B) will experience a significant decline. This situation can trigger an immediate reduction in action entropy, impeding the model’s ability to explore the optimal action combination (B, B ) due to insufficient exploration-exploitation mechanisms; specifically, the probability of Agent 1 exploring action B, 

π1(a1 = B|O ), decreases dramatically. Subsequently, when Agent 1 opts for action A with increased probability, the positive reward and advantage value will further elevate the action probability of 

π1(a1 = A|O ) while correspondingly reducing π1(a1 = B|O ), thereby exacerbating this dilemma. Although [ 10 ; 11 ] attempted to mitigate this issue by learning the decision order and agent actions simultaneously, such an approach substantially increases training complexity, as the search space over action orders grows to n!. More importantly, greater flexibility in ordering does not fundamentally resolve the optimization limitations of sequential decision making. According to the theoretical analyses in [ 19 ; 21 ; 20 ], such sequential updating methods generally guarantee convergence only to a Nash Equilibrium (NE). For example, in the game shown in Fig. 1, conventional MAT-based methods may converge to a Pareto-suboptimal NE. This limitation motivates us to move beyond sequential MARL formulations and instead bridge cooperative MARL to SARL, where many optimization methods provide stronger guarantees of convergence toward optimal solutions. However, to the best of our knowledge, such a formulation has not yet been established in the existing literature. From this perspective, a closely related line of research is to formulate cooperative decision mak-ing directly within a SARL framework. Recently, [ 12 ] proposed Triple-BERT, a SARL frame-work for ride-sharing tasks, which aims to directly learn the joint action probability using a BERT model [ 22 ]. Specifically, it assumes that the joint action probability π(A|O ) can be expressed as 

z( Qni=1 πi(ai|O )) , where z( ·) is an increasing mapping function. However, this assumption does not always hold in practice, and as a result, the method can still suffer from credit assignment issues similar to those in MAT. For instance, in the example shown in Fig. 2, exploring the action (B, A )

can reduce the probability of π1(a1 = B|O ), thereby making it less likely to explore the optimal action combination (B, B ). Due to page limitations, a more detailed discussion of related work is provided in Appendix A. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Overview 

In this paper, we propose an order-independent MAT [ 8] inspired by the consensus mechanism, named the CMAT. Unlike conventional MAT, our approach utilizes a decoder to iterate a consensus vector instead of specifying detailed actions, simulating the process by which all agents reach an agreement on their strategies in latent space. This method can be viewed as a hierarchical SARL approach, where the consensus c serves as a high-level action that incorporates the strategies of each agent, guiding their respective low-level actions ai. With the consensus vector, the action probability of each agent πi(ai|O , c ) can be treated independently, given that the policies of other agents are encapsulated within the consensus c. Consequently, the joint action policy can be expressed as: 

π(A|O ) = πc(c|O )

> n

Y

> i=1

πi(ai|O , c ) , (3) where πc denotes the policy for generating the consensus. In this way, we treat all agents as a unified entity and directly apply a single-agent PPO approach [ 13 ] to optimize the joint action policy 

π(A|O ).The overall network architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3 and is built on the Transformer backbone [9 ]. First, the encoder extracts features and relationships among the observations of all agents using bi-directional self-attention, resulting in an observation embedding sequence ˆO. Next, a Critic-4Figure 3: Network Architecture: The Transformer encoder first extracts the features and relationships among the observations of all agents, compressing them into a single initial consensus vector. This vector is used for V-value estimation and iterated by the Transformer decoder to produce the final consensus vector. The final consensus vector is then combined with the extracted features of each agent’s observation from the encoder to generate actions. Compressor compresses this sequence into a single vector e0, which is then used by the Critic-MLP to estimate the V-value V( O). This vector is also input to the Transformer decoder to perform consensus iteration for m times, producing a sequence of consensus vectors {e1, e 2, . . . , e m}. Subsequently, an Actor-Compressor compresses the set E = {e0, e 1, e 2, . . . , e m} into a single vector c, representing the final consensus and reflecting the potential strategy of all agents. Finally, the actor is generated by the Actor-MLP, which combines the consensus vector c with the observation embedding ˆoi of each agent. Below we will discuss the details of each component within this architecture. 

3.2 Network Architecture A. Encoder: In the proposed framework, we first utilize a Transformer encoder to extract features and relationships among agents. Specifically, since the input needs to be order-independent, we eliminate the positional embedding that is commonly used in similar works [ 12 ; 8 ]. The extraction process can be expressed as: 

ˆO = Encoder( O) ∈ Rn,d , (4) where d is the hidden dimension. Afterwards, we employ the Critic-Compressor to reduce ˆO into a single vector, referred to as the initial consensus vector e0, represented by the following process: 

x ∈ RN ×d1 ,M = Softmax (MLP (x), dim=0 ) ∈ RN,h  

> +

,z = M T · x ∈ Rd1,h ,y = MLP (Flatten (z)) ∈ Rd2 ,

(5) where x and y represent the input and output of the compressor, respectively, N is the length, 

d1, h, and d2 are hidden dimensions, and M and z are intermediate variables. This structure is commonly used in sequence compression [ 23 ; 24 ], motivated by the following considerations: First, the intermediate feature z is constructed from the original sequence x using h different combinations. 5For the ith combination, it derives from a mixture of the original sequence, weighted by the ith 

row of the weight matrix M . Finally, the output hidden feature is produced by applying an MLP to compress the intermediate feature z. In the context of the Critic-Compressor, x and y correspond to 

ˆO and e0, respectively, while dimensions d1 and d2 are both set to d.Subsequently, we use the Critic-MLP to process the initial consensus vector e0 to obtain the estimated V-value, expressed as: 

ˆV( O) = Critic-MLP (e0) ,e0 = Critic-Compressor ( ˆO) . (6) 

B. Decoder: For the decoder, we first auto-regressively iterate the consensus vector to achieve a converged strategy among agents, formulated as: 

{e1, e 2, . . . , e m} = Decoder( e0) . (7) Unlike MAT, the positional embedding of the decoder is retained because we want the model to be aware of the convergence process of the consensus. Following this, we utilize the Actor-Compressor to compress E to obtain the final consensus vector, expressed as: 

c = Actor-Compressor (E) , (8) which follows the same procedural process as the Critic-Compressor defined in Eq. 5. Here, we choose to utilize the combination of the entire set E instead of only the last generated vector em as the consensus. This decision helps to prevent any potential information loss that may occur during the iteration process. 

Finally, we combine the consensus vector c with the observation feature ˆoi and feed them to the Actor-MLP to generate the action for agent i, given by: 

ai = Actor-MLP ([ˆ oi; c]) . (9) 

3.3 Training Process A. Training: In our CMAT, we view all agents as a unified entity through a SARL perspective. The policy is optimized directly using a single-agent PPO approach: 

LCM AT Critic (ϕ) = Et∈T 

(R( Ot, At) + γVϕ− (Ot+1 ) − Vϕ(Ot)) 2 ,

LCM AT Actor (θ) = Ei∈N ,t ∈T 

min  Rit(θ)A( Ot, At), CLIP( Rit(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)A( Ot, At) , (10) where the ratio Rit(θ) is defined as (derived from Eq. 3): 

Rit(θ) = πθ (Ait|O t)

πθ− (Ait|O t) = πcθ (c|O ) Qni=1 πi(ai|O , c )

πcθ− (c−|O ) Qni=1 πi(ai|O , c −) =

Qni=1 πiθ (ai|O , μ θ (O)) 

Qni=1 πiθ− (ai|O , μ θ− (O)) , (11) where c = μθ (O) and c− = μθ− (O) are consensus vectors generated by the current and old actors, respectively, and μθ (·) represents the consensus generation policy. Since the consensus generation process is deterministic, similar to TD3 and DDPG, both πcθ (c|O ) and πcθ− (c−|O ) are fixed at 1. The consensus generation policy is updated implicitly that during backpropagation, the gradient flows back to μθ (O).To illustrate how CMAT resolves the dilemma shown in Fig. 2, consider again the joint action (B, A ).Under our formulation, the affected probability is π1(a1 = B|O , c ), which is conditioned on the specific consensus c and therefore tied only to the particular latent strategy that led to the suboptimal joint action. As a result, reducing this probability mainly indicates that the consensus c (i.e., μ(O)) is suboptimal, rather than penalizing action B for Agent 1 in an unconditional manner. In contrast, the policy under the optimal consensus c∗, namely π1(a1 = B|O , c ∗), remains unaffected. Meanwhile, the consensus generation module μ(O) is updated through gradient descent based on the overall advantage, gradually steering μ(O) toward c∗ over time. 

B. Fine-tuning: In the previous training phase, the consensus generation policy μθ (O) and the action policy πθ (·|O , c ) were trained simultaneously, which can lead to potential mutual interference. To address this, we introduce a fine-tuning phase for further enhancement. Specifically, we continue 6training the model using the loss function defined in Eq. 10 and provide two alternative approaches: 

(i) Consensus Enhancement: In this approach, we fine-tune the critic Vϕ(O) and the consensus generation policy μθ (O), while keeping the action policy πθ (·|O , c ) fixed. This means that only the gradients of the Critic-MLP, decoder, and Actor-Compressor are activated, with all other components remaining unchanged. (ii) Action Policy Enhancement: In this approach, we fine-tune the critic Vϕ(O) and the action policy πθ (·|O , c ), while fixing the consensus generation policy μθ (O). In this case, we only allow gradients to flow through the Critic-MLP and Actor-MLP, keeping all other parts of the model fixed. Through experimentation, we observe that both enhancement methods yield similar performance, which can be viewed as equivalent from the SARL perspective. The whole training process is provided at Appendix C and a simplified theory analysis is provided at Appendix E. 

# 4 Experiment 

4.1 Experiment Setup 

To validate the efficiency of our proposed method, we evaluate its performance in a series of benchmark MARL experiment scenarios, including: • StarCraft II [ 14 ]: A challenging real-time strategy game environment that provides complex micromanagement tasks for testing multi-agent cooperation and coordination. Since many advanced MARL methods can achieve a 100% win rate in simpler environments [ 8 ], we focus on the most difficult task scenarios for comparison in this paper, including “MMM2", “6h vs 8z", and “3s5z vs 3s6z". • Multi-Agent MuJoCo [ 15 ]: A set of continuous control robotic tasks adapted from MuJoCo, where multiple agents must coordinate to control a single or multiple articulated bodies, testing fine-grained cooperation. We select three challenging scenarios, each with a single agent controlling one body: “8 ×1-Agent Ant", “6 ×1-Agent HalfCheetah", and “6 ×1-Agent Walker2d". • Google Research Football [ 16 ]: A highly realistic football simulation platform that requires agents to master individual skills and long-horizon teamwork strategies in a dynamic, physics-based environment. The detailed tasks include “academy counterattack easy", “academy pass and shoot with keeper", and “academy 3 vs 1 with keeper". To illustrate the superior performance of our method, we compare it against several strong baselines, using the same settings as reported in [8]: • MAT [ 8]: The first centralized observation with a sequential decision-making MARL framework. More details are presented in Section 2.2. • PMAT [ 10 ]: Based on MAT, PMAT introduces an additional module to determine agent action order, grounded in the theory of Plackett-Luce sampling [ 25 ; 26 ]. AOAD-MAT [ 11 ], a synchronous work, employs a similar method to PMAT but decides action order followed by detailed action decision, while AOAD-MAT does both simultaneously. Given the high similarity between them and the fact that only PMAT provides official code, we select PMAT as the benchmark here. • Triple-BERT [ 12 ]: Triple-BERT is the first centralized SARL framework for the ride-sharing task, utilizing BERT for observation feature and relationship extraction and processing a large action space through an action decomposition mechanism. Here, we modify it into a PPO-style method as MAT, considering the differences between standard MARL tasks and combinatorial optimization problems. • HAPPO [ 19 ; 20 ]: HAPPO first illustrates and proves the efficiency of sequential optimization among agents in cooperative MARL scenarios, providing a strong foundation for MAT. Based on [ 20 ], HAPPO serves as the SOTA method in the family of Heterogeneous-Agent Reinforcement Learning (HARL) methods. • MAPPO [ 27 ]: MAPPO is a popular and strong CTDE baseline in cooperative MARL, utilizing a centralized critic during training to provide direction for actors with global information, while actors operate independently during execution. More details about the experiment configurations can be found at Appendix D. 7(a) Legend      

> (b) MMM2 (c) 6h vs 8z (d) 3s5z vs 3s6z
> (e) 8 ×1-Agent Ant (f) 6 ×1-Agent HalfCheetah (g) 6 ×1-Agent Walker2d
> (h) academy counterattack easy (i) academy pass and shoot with keeper
> (j) academy 3 vs 1 with keeper

Figure 4: Training Curves under 5 Random Seeds: The shadow parts represent the standard deviation. 

4.2 Experiment Results 

The experimental results are shown in Fig. 4. Note that the two CMAT-finetune curves start with high performance because they are initialized from the well-trained CMAT. We observe that CMAT achieves superior performance in most scenarios, and its advantage becomes more evident after fine-tuning, with both CMAT-finetune variants achieving the best performance across all scenarios. Notably, the results of CMAT-finetune (action) clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our consensus mechanism. If the consensus were invalid and independent of the states, it could be disregarded by the action head, in which case CMAT would degrade to Triple-BERT, where all agents take actions simultaneously without any consensus. 

It is worth noting that certain experimental results deviate from those reported in the original papers. This is attributable to the hardware-constrained setup detailed in Appendix D. Nevertheless, we stress that all comparisons are valid, since all methods were subjected to the same experimental conditions. 

8(a) Legend      

> (b) MMM2 (c) 6h vs 8z (d) 3s5z vs 3s6z
> (e) 8 ×1-Agent Ant (f) 6 ×1-Agent HalfCheetah (g) 6 ×1-Agent Walker2d
> (h) academy counterattack easy (i) academy pass and shoot with keeper
> (j) academy 3 vs 1 with keeper

Figure 5: Ablation Study under 5 Random Seeds 

4.3 Ablation Study and Sensitivity Analysis 

To further illustrate the efficacy of each proposed module, we conduct a series of ablation studies and sensitivity analyses of hyper-parameters, including: • Consensus Mixture Versus Last Consensus: We propose the decoder (actor) compressor to mix the middle-generated consensus E to avoid information loss during the auto-regressive decoding process. Here, we compare the performance of our mixture method against the direct use of the last generated consensus vector em.• Impact of Consensus Iteration Times: In our method, there is only one newly introduced hyperparameter compared to CMAT, namely the decoder iteration times m. We default this to the number of agents n, with the intuition that in the worst-case scenario, CMAT can degrade to MAT. Here, we additionally compare the performance under m = 0 , ⌊ n 

> 2

⌋, 2n.The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5. We observe that when directly using the last consensus instead of mixing all consensus outputs via our Actor-Compressor, the model performance decreases in most scenarios, suggesting that the decoder auto-regression process may lose some useful informa-tion from previous generations. Regarding the consensus iteration time, we find that selecting n (the 9number of agents) as the iteration count is a proper choice: too few iterations may be insufficient to generate a good consensus among agents, while too many iterations may introduce excessive noise and redundant information, thereby increasing the training difficulty of the Actor-Compressor. Intuitively, choosing the number of iterations equal to n aligns with the decoding process of MAT, allowing each agent to sufficiently adjust its action in response to the actions of others. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we proposed CMAT, a novel centralized method for fully observable cooperative MARL tasks. By using a Transformer decoder to iteratively generate a consensus representation, CMAT bridges cooperative MARL to a hierarchical SARL framework, in which all agents act simultaneously while conditioning on a shared consensus and full information about one another. Built upon the theory of SARL PPO, CMAT offers stronger potential for global optimization and alleviates several key limitations of conventional MAT, including order dependency, actor-critic inconsistency, and the fact that it generally guarantees convergence only to a Nash Equilibrium. Extensive experiments on a series of standard MARL benchmarks demonstrate that CMAT consistently outperforms strong baselines. Additional discussions are provided in Appendix F. 

# References 

[1] M. A. Hady, S. Hu, M. Pratama, Z. Cao, and R. Kowalczyk, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning for resources allocation optimization: a survey,” Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 58, no. 11, p. 354, 2025. [2] W. Jin, H. Du, B. Zhao, X. Tian, B. Shi, and G. Yang, “A comprehensive survey on multi-agent cooperative decision-making: Scenarios, approaches, challenges and perspectives,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13415 , 2025. [3] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 21, no. 178, pp. 1–51, 2020. [4] Y. Yang, R. Luo, M. Li, M. Zhou, W. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Mean field multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 5571–5580, PMLR, 2018. [5] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson, “Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, 2018. [6] A. Oroojlooy and D. Hajinezhad, “A review of cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Intelligence , vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 13677–13722, 2023. [7] X. Li, X. Wang, C. Bai, and J. Zhang, “Exponential topology-enabled scalable communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [8] M. Wen, J. Kuba, R. Lin, W. Zhang, Y. Wen, J. Wang, and Y. Yang, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 35, pp. 16509–16521, 2022. [9] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 30, 2017. [10] K. Hu, M. Wen, X. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Shi, M. Li, M. Li, and Y. Wen, “Pmat: Optimizing action generation order in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , pp. 997–1005, 2025. [11] S. Takayama and K. Fujita, “Aoad-mat: Transformer-based multi-agent deep reinforcement learning model considering agents’ order of action decisions,” in International Conference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems , pp. 303–310, Springer, 2025. 10 [12] Z. Zhao and S. Li, “Triple-bert: Do we really need marl for order dispatch on ride-sharing platforms?,” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [13] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [14] S. Whiteson, M. Samvelyan, T. Rashid, C. De Witt, G. Farquhar, N. Nardelli, T. Rudner, C. Hung, P. Torr, and J. Foerster, “The starcraft multi-agent challenge,” in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ,pp. 2186–2188, 2019. [15] C. S. de Witt, B. Peng, P.-A. Kamienny, P. Torr, W. Böhmer, and S. Whiteson, “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentralized continuous cooperative control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06709 , vol. 19, 2020. [16] K. Kurach, A. Raichuk, P. Sta´ nczyk, M. Zaj ˛ ac, O. Bachem, L. Espeholt, C. Riquelme, D. Vincent, M. Michalski, O. Bousquet, et al. , “Google research football: A novel reinforcement learning environment,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 34, pp. 4501– 4510, 2020. [17] M. L. Littman, “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in 

Machine learning proceedings 1994 , pp. 157–163, Elsevier, 1994. [18] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 , 2015. [19] J. Kuba, R. Chen, M. Wen, Y. Wen, F. Sun, J. Wang, and Y. Yang, “Trust region policy optimisa-tion in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in ICLR 2022-10th International Conference on Learning Representations , p. 1046, The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. [20] Y. Zhong, J. G. Kuba, X. Feng, S. Hu, J. Ji, and Y. Yang, “Heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 25, no. 32, pp. 1–67, 2024. [21] J. Liu, Y. Zhong, S. Hu, H. Fu, Q. FU, X. Chang, and Y. Yang, “Maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [22] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technolo-gies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pp. 4171–4186, 2019. [23] Z. Zhao, F. Meng, Z. Lyu, H. Li, X. Li, and G. Zhu, “Csi-bert2: A bert-inspired framework for efficient csi prediction and classification in wireless communication and sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2025. [24] Y.-H. Chou, I.-C. Chen, J. Ching, C.-J. Chang, and Y.-H. Yang, “Midibert-piano: Large-scale pre-training for symbolic music classification tasks,” Journal of Creative Music Systems , vol. 8, no. 1, 2024. [25] R. D. Luce et al. , Individual choice behavior , vol. 4. Wiley New York, 1959. [26] R. L. Plackett, “The analysis of permutations,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 193–202, 1975. [27] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu, “The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 35, pp. 24611–24624, 2022. [28] L. Yuan, Z. Zhang, L. Li, C. Guan, and Y. Yu, “A survey of progress on cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning in open environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01058 , 2023. 11 [29] L. Matignon, G. J. Laurent, and N. Le Fort-Piat, “Hysteretic q-learning: an algorithm for decentralized reinforcement learning in cooperative multi-agent teams,” in 2007 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pp. 64–69, IEEE, 2007. [30] H. Mao, Z. Zhang, Z. Xiao, and Z. Gong, “Modelling the dynamic joint policy of teammates with attention multi-agent ddpg,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07029 , 2018. [31] J. Li, K. Kuang, B. Wang, F. Liu, L. Chen, F. Wu, and J. Xiao, “Shapley counterfactual credits for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pp. 934–942, 2021. [32] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi, M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, et al. , “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 2085–2087, 2018. [33] J. Su, S. Adams, and P. Beling, “Value-decomposition multi-agent actor-critics,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 35, pp. 11352–11360, 2021. [34] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “Qtran: Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 5887–5896, PMLR, 2019. [35] J. Hao and P. Varakantham, “Hierarchical value decomposition for effective on-demand ride-pooling,” in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , pp. 580–587, 2022. [36] P. Varshavskaya, L. P. Kaelbling, and D. Rus, “Efficient distributed reinforcement learning through agreement,” in Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 8 , pp. 367–378, Springer, 2009. [37] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus, et al. , “Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. [38] A. Das, T. Gervet, J. Romoff, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rabbat, and J. Pineau, “Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication,” in International Conference on machine learning , pp. 1538–1546, PMLR, 2019. [39] X. Li and J. Zhang, “Context-aware communication for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , pp. 1156–1164, 2024. [40] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [41] Z. Zhao, D. Jin, Z. Zhou, and X. Zhang, “Automatic stage lighting control: Is it a rule-driven process or generative task?,” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [42] S. Hu, L. Shen, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, and D. Tao, “On transforming reinforcement learning with transformers: The development trajectory,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 8580–8599, 2024. [43] M. J. Hausknecht and P. Stone, “Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps.,” in 

AAAI fall symposia , vol. 45, p. 141, 2015. [44] E. Parisotto, F. Song, J. Rae, R. Pascanu, C. Gulcehre, S. Jayakumar, M. Jaderberg, R. L. Kaufman, A. Clark, S. Noury, et al. , “Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learning,” in 

International conference on machine learning , pp. 7487–7498, PMLR, 2020. [45] C. Chen, J. Yoon, Y.-F. Wu, and S. Ahn, “Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning with trans-former world models,” in Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021 , 2021. 12 [46] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [47] M. Janner, Q. Li, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence modeling problem,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 34, pp. 1273–1286, 2021. [48] L. Chen, K. Lu, A. Rajeswaran, K. Lee, A. Grover, M. Laskin, P. Abbeel, A. Srinivas, and I. Mordatch, “Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 34, pp. 15084–15097, 2021. [49] Q. Zheng, A. Zhang, and A. Grover, “Online decision transformer,” in international conference on machine learning , pp. 27042–27059, PMLR, 2022. [50] T. Yamagata, A. Khalil, and R. Santos-Rodriguez, “Q-learning decision transformer: Leveraging dynamic programming for conditional sequence modelling in offline rl,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 38989–39007, PMLR, 2023. [51] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2009. [52] M. Reid, Y. Yamada, and S. S. Gu, “Can wikipedia help offline reinforcement learning?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12122 , 2022. [53] S. Li, X. Puig, C. Paxton, Y. Du, C. Wang, L. Fan, T. Chen, D.-A. Huang, E. Akyürek, A. Anandkumar, et al. , “Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 31199–31212, 2022. [54] F. Liu, H. Liu, A. Grover, and P. Abbeel, “Masked autoencoding for scalable and generalizable decision making,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 12608– 12618, 2022. [55] P. Wu, A. Majumdar, K. Stone, Y. Lin, I. Mordatch, P. Abbeel, and A. Rajeswaran, “Masked trajectory models for prediction, representation, and control,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 37607–37623, PMLR, 2023. [56] M. Xu, Y. Shen, S. Zhang, Y. Lu, D. Zhao, J. Tenenbaum, and C. Gan, “Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization,” in international conference on machine learning ,pp. 24631–24645, PMLR, 2022. [57] R. Lin, Y. Li, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, X. H. W. Fung, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Du, and Y. Yang, “Con-textual transformer for offline meta reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.08016 ,2022. [58] K.-H. Lee, O. Nachum, M. S. Yang, L. Lee, D. Freeman, S. Guadarrama, I. Fischer, W. Xu, E. Jang, H. Michalewski, et al. , “Multi-game decision transformers,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 27921–27936, 2022. [59] S. Reed, K. Zolna, E. Parisotto, S. G. Colmenarejo, A. Novikov, G. Barth-Maron, M. Gimenez, Y. Sulsky, J. Kay, J. T. Springenberg, et al. , “A generalist agent,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175 , 2022. [60] S. Hu, L. Shen, Y. Zhang, and D. Tao, “Learning multi-agent communication from graph modeling perspective,” 2024. [61] J. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Z. You, Z. Zhou, C. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, and W. Ouyang, “MaskMA: Towards zero-shot multi-agent decision making with mask-based collaborative learning,” Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. [62] S. Hu, F. Zhu, X. Chang, and X. Liang, “Updet: Universal multi-agent reinforcement learning via policy decoupling with transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08001 , 2021. [63] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. , “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. 13 [64] A. Agarwal, S. M. Kakade, J. D. Lee, and G. Mahajan, “On the theory of policy gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 22, no. 98, pp. 1–76, 2021. [65] J. Mei, C. Xiao, C. Szepesvari, and D. Schuurmans, “On the global convergence rates of softmax policy gradient methods,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 6820–6829, PMLR, 2020. [66] D. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Kuang, X. Shen, O. Ozer, and Q. Zhang, “Convergence rates of bayesian network policy gradient for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Bayesian Decision-making and Uncertainty , 2024. [67] V. Nanduri and T. K. Das, “A reinforcement learning algorithm for obtaining the nash equilib-rium of multi-player matrix games,” IIE Transactions , vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 158–167, 2009. [68] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, et al. , Reinforcement learning: An introduction , vol. 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. [69] Q. Xiao, S. Lu, and T. Chen, “A generalized alternating method for bilevel learning under the polyak-{\ L} ojasiewicz condition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02422 , 2023. [70] M. Holzleitner, L. Gruber, J. Arjona-Medina, J. Brandstetter, and S. Hochreiter, “Convergence proof for actor-critic methods applied to ppo and rudder,” in Transactions on large-scale data-and knowledge-centered systems XLVIII: special issue in memory of univ. prof. dr. roland wagner , pp. 105–130, Springer, 2021. [71] N.-C. Huang, P.-C. Hsieh, K.-H. Ho, and I.-C. Wu, “Ppo-clip attains global optimality: To-wards deeper understandings of clipping,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, pp. 12600–12607, 2024. [72] T. Fiez, B. Chasnov, and L. Ratliff, “Implicit learning dynamics in stackelberg games: Equilibria characterization, convergence analysis, and empirical study,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 3133–3144, PMLR, 2020. 14 Appendix Contents 

A Related Work 16 

A.1 Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 A.2 Transformer in Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

B Value Function Definition 17 C Algorithm 18 D Experiment Configurations 18 E Theoretical Analysis from a Cooperative Stackelberg Perspective 18 

E.1 Preliminary Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 E.2 Reformulation as a Cooperative Stackelberg Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 E.3 Theoretical Justification 1: The Leader’s Problem as a Finite MDP . . . . . . . . . 20 E.4 Theoretical Justification 2: Consensus as a Coordination Signal . . . . . . . . . . . 20 E.5 Theoretical Justification 3: Alternating Optimization as Block Coordinate Ascent . 20 E.6 Comparison with MAT: Order Independence and Pareto Improvement . . . . . . . 20 E.7 Relation to Existing Convergence Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 E.8 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

F Discussions 21 

15 A Related Work 

A.1 Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Cooperative MARL has found extensive applications across diverse domains, including power control, robotic fleet management, and ride-hailing systems [ 28 ]. As highlighted in a comprehensive survey [6], existing methods can be taxonomically classified into five major categories: independent learning, centralized critic, value decomposition, consensus-based, and communication-based approaches. Early research predominantly focused on independent learners, which represent the most straightfor-ward adaptation of single-agent RL to multi-agent settings. By treating each agent as an independent entity and considering others as part of the environment, standard RL algorithms can be readily applied. However, this paradigm suffers from fundamental limitations: the environment becomes inherently non-stationary due to concurrently learning peers, and agents tend to converge to local optima by maximizing individual rewards while neglecting global cooperation. Although subse-quent improvements such as Hysteretic Q-Learning [ 29 ] were proposed to mitigate these issues, independent learning still struggles in large-scale systems and sparse-reward scenarios. To address these challenges, the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) and Centralized Training with Centralized Execution (CTCE) paradigms have been widely adopted in centralized critic and value decomposition methods [ 6]. In centralized critic approaches, actor-critic algorithms such as PPO, SAC, and DDPG are extended by replacing the critic with a centralized counterpart that observes global information during training, thereby stabilizing the learning process while preserving decentralized execution. To further enhance representational capacity, attention mechanisms inspired by the Transformer architecture [ 9 ] have been incorporated to model inter-agent relationships [ 30 ]. Foerster et al. [ 5 ] proposed Counterfactual Multi-Agent (COMA) policy gradients to resolve the credit assignment problem through counterfactual baselines, an idea subse-quently refined in works such as [ 31 ]. Nevertheless, many of these methods encounter the Curse of Dimensionality (CoD) as the number of agents scales up. Value decomposition methods, by contrast, focus on factorizing the global reward into individual credit assignments, enabling agents to optimize collective objectives rather than selfish returns. The seminal Value Decomposition (VD) network [ 32 ] pioneered this direction but suffered from the “lazy agent" problem due to its simplistic additive Q-value factorization. Subsequent advances have significantly improved representational capacity through more expressive mixing architectures, including QMIX [ 3] which enforces monotonicity constraints, Value-Decomposition Actor-Critic (VDAC) [ 33 ], and QTRAN [ 34 ] which lifts monotonicity restrictions. However, most of these approaches require a mixing network to map individual Q-values to the global Q-value, and even with hyper-networks for parameter generation, they still grapple with scalability as agent populations grow [35]. Consensus and communication methods emerged later as a means to balance cooperation efficiency against the CoD challenge. In these paradigms, agents exchange information only with neighbors or selected peers rather than broadcasting globally. Consensus-based approaches leverage sparse communication to achieve policy alignment among agents, often with convergence guarantees under linear function approximation [ 36 ]. However, many such methods require multiple communication rounds, rendering them impractical for real-time applications like ride-sharing where low latency is paramount. Communication-based methods instead focus on designing efficient mechanisms for determining what information to share and with whom. CommNet [ 37 ] pioneered this direction by broadcasting each agent’s hidden features derived from local observations. Yet, similar to Mean Field MARL approaches [ 4 ], CommNet considers only averaged influences, overlooking fine-grained inter-agent relationships. Subsequent attention-based methods were introduced to weigh the importance of information from different sources [ 38 ; 39 ]. However, communication-based methods face nontrivial training difficulties, particularly in early stages when communicated messages carry limited meaningful information. Furthermore, they often involve inherent trade-offs between cooperation efficacy, communication overhead, and message content—issues intimately tied to CoD. 

A.2 Transformer in Reinforcement Learning 

Inspired by the success of the Transformer [ 9] in Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly its scalability, strong generalization, and ability to capture long-range dependencies, the architecture has 16 been widely adopted in fields such as computer vision [ 40 ], signal processing [ 41 ], and reinforcement learning [ 8 ]. According to [ 42 ], Transformer-based methods in RL can be broadly categorized into three main applications: (i) architecture enhancement, where Transformers serve as more powerful backbones to improve policy or model capacity; (ii) offline RL, where they learn from sequential trajectory data; and (iii) online RL, where they are integrated to enrich the learning paradigm. In the context of architecture enhancement, most works leverage the Transformer’s ability to model long-term temporal dependencies, particularly in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), where solutions previously relied on recurrent architectures such as DRQN [ 43 ]. For example, the Gated Transformer-XL (GTrXL) [ 44 ] introduces a gating mechanism with pathway skip connections, achieving improved feature extraction from historical trajectories. Another line of research employs Transformers for environment modeling in model-based RL, capitalizing on their strong sequence prediction capabilities. TransDreamer [ 45 ], for instance, integrates Transformers into the Dreamer framework to construct a stochastic world model, outperforming conventional RNN-based counterparts [46]. For offline RL, the most prominent methods are the Trajectory Transformer (TT) [ 47 ] and the Decision Transformer (DT) [ 48 ]. TT models each feature of state, action, and reward as separate tokens and formulates behavior cloning as a next-token prediction task. In contrast, DT treats each state-action-reward triple as a single entity and frames the problem as a reward-to-go (RTG) guided sequence prediction task. These two works have profoundly influenced subsequent research. For instance, Online DT (ODT) [ 49 ] extends DT to an offline pre-training and online fine-tuning paradigm, addressing the distribution shift between offline trajectories and online interactions. Q-Learning DT (QDT) [50] further refines dataset quality by relabeling RTGs. Recently, the success of LLMs has prompted researchers to explore how their generalization prop-erties, such as few-shot learning and rich representations, can benefit RL. Building on transfer learning theory [51], several studies directly leverage pre-trained Transformers to initialize RL poli-cies [ 52 ; 53 ]. Others introduce masked prediction tasks during offline RL pre-training to enhance feature extraction [ 54 ; 55 ]. [ 12 ] proposes a multi-agent pre-training method to improve single-agent RL under data scarcity. Inspired by the in-context learning capabilities of LLMs, [ 56 ; 57 ] investigate prompting-based methods that guide policies by conditioning on expert demonstrations. Moreover, [ 58 ; 59 ] train policies across multiple tasks in a multi-task setting, achieving generalization through direct exposure to diverse environments. The aforementioned methods predominantly operate in offline or offline-to-online settings, as Trans-formers in single-agent RL are primarily used to model historical trajectories. In contrast, in MARL, Transformers are well-suited for capturing inter-agent relationships, leading to a surge of online MARL methods. The mat (MAT) [ 8] pioneered this direction by employing an encoder to model agent interactions and a decoder for sequential decision-making. Subsequent works have built upon MAT in various ways. For example, [ 11 ; 10 ] jointly optimize action selection and decision order, highlighting the significant impact of ordering on performance. CommFormer [ 60 ] integrates graph attention networks to enable communication-efficient decentralized execution in a centralized training paradigm. Other approaches, such as MaskMA [ 61 ] and UPDeT [ 62 ], focus on learning general action representations with Transformers for agent interaction modeling. However, they still require task-specific architectural design, which limits their practical applicability. 

# B Value Function Definition 

The standard value functions are defined as follows: 

Vπ (Ot) = Eπ

" ∞X 

> τ=t

γτ −tR( Oτ , Aτ ) | O t

#

,

Qπ (Ot, At) = Eπ

" ∞X 

> τ=t

γτ −tR( Oτ , Aτ ) | O t, At

#

,

Aπ (Ot, At) = Q π (Ot, At) − Vπ (Ot) ,

(12) where Vπ (·), Qπ (·, ·), and Aπ (·, ·) denote the observation value function, the observation-action value function, and the advantage function, respectively. 17 We further define the Q-value function for a specific agent set ψ as [8; 19; 20]: 

Qψπ (Ot, a ψt ) = Eˆa−ψt ∼π

h

Qπ (Ot, [aψt , ˆa−ψt ]) 

i

, (13) where −ψ denotes the complement of ψ. Based on this definition, the advantage function for ψ given the actions of Ψ is defined as 

Aψπ (Ot, a Ψ 

> t

, a ψt ) = Q ψ∪Ψ 

> π

(Ot, [aψt , a Ψ 

> t

]) − Qψπ (Ot, a ψt ) , (14) where ψ and Ψ are disjoint sets. For notational simplicity, we omit the policy symbol π in the following sections whenever no ambiguity arises. 

# C Algorithm 

The detailed training process of the proposed CMAT is provided in Algorithm 1. 

# D Experiment Configurations 

For all evaluated scenarios, the model configurations follow those established in MAT [ 8], with the exception of setting the rollout threads to 8 due to hardware limitations. These configurations are also adopted for comparative methods unless their original papers or official repositories specify alternative setups. Our implementation is built upon the official MAT repository, available at 

https://github.com/PKU-MARL/Multi-Agent-Transformer .It is worth noting that certain experimental results, particularly those on StarCraft II, may deviate from the originally reported figures in MAT. These discrepancies arise from differences in random seeds and software versions. To ensure reproducibility, we detail the exact software versions used in our experiments. These version specifications apply uniformly to all comparative methods: • StarCraft II : PySC2 version 4.0.0, SMAC version 1.0.0, with underlying StarCraft II game version Base55958. • Multi-Agent MuJoCo : MuJoCo version 3.4.0, PettingZoo version 1.25.0. The evaluated robotic environments include HalfCheetah-v2, Ant-v2, and Walker2D-v2. • Google Research Football : GFootball version 2.10.2. All models were trained using the PyTorch framework [ 63 ] on a workstation running Windows 11, equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-14700KF processor and an NVIDIA RTX 4080 graphics card. The GPU occupation is around 0.5-1.5 GB during the whole training process. 

Here we want to emphasis due to hardware limitations, we were unable to run the original simulation versions with the recommended number of rollout threads specified in MAT [ 8], as these settings frequently caused system instability on our device. While we acknowledge that this adjustment may prevent the evaluated methods from achieving their theoretical performance upper bounds, the comparison remains fair, as all methods were tested under identical modified conditions. 

# E Theoretical Analysis from a Cooperative Stackelberg Perspective 

This appendix provides a theoretical justification of CMAT’s hierarchical design under simplified (tabular) conditions, building on established convergence results in tabular and linear settings. The analysis clarifies how the latent consensus mechanism eliminates the order-dependent bias inherent in sequential MARL formulations such as MAT. It does not constitute a formal convergence proof for deep neural network implementations; rather, it illustrates the structural principles that underpin CMAT’s empirical effectiveness. 

E.1 Preliminary Assumptions 

For rigorous statements we adopt standard assumptions: finite observation space O and action spaces 

Ai; a finite consensus set C; softmax policy parameterization with full support; Robbins–Monro step sizes; and ergodicity of the induced Markov chain [64; 65; 66]. 18 Algorithm 1 Consensus Multi-Agent Transformer (CMAT) 

Require: Number of agents n, consensus iterations m, PPO hyper-parameters ϵ, γ, GAE parameter 

λ, total training steps Ttotal 

Ensure: Trained policy network θ and critic network ϕ 

> 1:

Initialize network parameters θ, ϕ, and target critic ϕ− ← ϕ 

> 2:

Procedure ActionSelection (O) ▷ Used for experience collection  

> 3:

ˆO ← Encoder( O) ▷ order-independent  

> 4:

e0 ← CriticCompressor( ˆO) 

> 5:

ˆV (O) ← CriticMLP( e0) 

> 6:

E ← { e0} 

> 7:

for k = 1 to m do  

> 8:

ek ← Decoder( ek−1, k ) ▷ auto-regressive with positional index k 

> 9:

E ← E ∪ { ek} 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

c ← ActorCompressor( E) 

> 12:

for i = 1 to n do  

> 13:

ai ∼ πiθ (· | ˆoi, c ) ▷ ActorMLP ([ˆ oi; c])  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return A = {a1, . . . , a n}, ˆV (O) 

> 16:

A.Training  

> 17:

while training steps < T total do  

> 18:

Collect trajectory τ = {(Ot, At, R t, Ot+1 )} by calling ActionSelection (Ot) 

> 19:

Compute advantages ˆAt using GAE with ˆVϕ− and λ 

> 20:

Compute critic loss:  

> 21:

Lcritic (ϕ) ← Et

h

(Rt + γ ˆVϕ− (Ot+1 ) − ˆVϕ(Ot)) 2

i 

> 22:

Compute importance ratio:  

> 23:

Rit(θ) ←

Qnj=1 πjθ (ajt | ˆojt , c θ )

Qnj=1 πjθ− (ajt | ˆojt , c θ− ) 

> 24:

Compute actor loss:  

> 25:

Lactor (θ) ← Ei,t 

h

min 



Rit(θ) ˆAt, CLIP (Rit(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

i  

> 26:

Update θ and ϕ by minimizing Lactor + Lcritic  

> 27:

Soft-update target network: ϕ− ← τ ϕ + (1 − τ )ϕ− 

> 28:

end while  

> 29:

B. Fine-tuning ▷ Continue from current θ, ϕ 

> 30:

if Consensus Enhancement then  

> 31:

Freeze all Actor-MLP layers  

> 32:

Continue training by updating only Critic-MLP, Decoder, and Actor-Compressor  

> 33:

else if Action Policy Enhancement then  

> 34:

Freeze Encoder, Decoder, Critic-Compressor, and Actor-Compressor  

> 35:

Continue training by updating only Critic-MLP and all Actor-MLP layers  

> 36:

end if  

> 37:

return Trained policy network θ and critic network ϕ

E.2 Reformulation as a Cooperative Stackelberg Game 

CMAT models the joint policy as 

π(A | O ) = 

> n

Y

> i=1

πi ai | O , c , c = μ(O), (15) where μ (the consensus generator) deterministically maps the global observation O to a consensus 

c, and each πi (the action policy for agent i) outputs a distribution conditioned on O and c. The objective is the discounted cumulative reward J(μ, π 1: n). This hierarchical structure can be viewed as 19 a cooperative Stackelberg game: the leader ( μ) commits to a strategy, anticipating that the followers (π1: n) will best respond. Because all agents share the same reward, the game is fully cooperative. Stackelberg equilibria can be more Pareto-efficient than Nash equilibria in such settings [67]. 

E.3 Theoretical Justification 1: The Leader’s Problem as a Finite MDP 

When the action policies π1: n are fixed, the leader faces a finite MDP with state space O, action space C, transition 

P (O′ | O , c ) = Eπ1: n

Penv (O′ | O , A) | c, (16) and reward r(O, c ) = Eπ1: n [R(O, A) | c]. For this finite MDP, policy iteration or Q - learning converges to the optimal consensus policy μ∗ in finitely many steps [68]. 

E.4 Theoretical Justification 2: Consensus as a Coordination Signal 

With μ fixed, the consensus c = μ(O) becomes a deterministic function of O. The followers’ joint policy factorises as Q 

> i

πi(ai | O , c ). Although the agents share network parameters in our implementation, the theoretical analysis in tabular settings treats each πi as a separate factor. Under tabular softmax parameterization, recent work has shown that multi - agent policy gradient converges to a Nash equilibrium of the cooperative Markov game [ 66 ; 20 ]. Under the tabular assumption, the followers’ optimisation decouples, and with a unique best response, the resulting Nash equilibrium coincides with the global optimum of J.

E.5 Theoretical Justification 3: Alternating Optimization as Block Coordinate Ascent 

The fine - tuning phase of CMAT (Consensus Enhancement and Action Policy Enhancement) performs alternating updates. This can be interpreted as block coordinate ascent on J:

μk+1 ← arg max  

> μ

J(μ, π 1: nk ), π1: nk+1 ← arg max  

> π1: n

J(μk+1 , π 1: n). (17) Each block update is a (concave) maximisation under tabular assumptions, guaranteeing monotonic improvement. The sequence J(μk, π 1: nk ) is non - decreasing and bounded, hence converges to a stationary point, which corresponds to a Stackelberg equilibrium. For bilevel problems where the lower objective satisfies the Polyak–Łojasiewicz condition, such alternating schemes achieve convergence rates comparable to single-level gradient descent [69]. Let ΠMAT and ΠCMAT denote the sets of joint policies representable by MAT and CMAT, respectively. For any fixed decision order σ, MAT corresponds to an autoregressive factorization π(A|O) = Qni=1 πσ(i)(aσ(i)|O, a σ(1: i−1) ). In contrast, CMAT admits 

ΠCMAT =

n

π(A|O) = πc(c|O)

> n

Y

> i=1

πi(ai|O, c ) πc, {πi}

o

.

It is immediate that ΠMAT ⊊ ΠCMAT , since any sequential policy can be recovered by letting c encode the prefix actions, while CMAT can additionally represent simultaneous coordination policies that have no causal ordering. 

E.6 Comparison with MAT: Order Independence and Pareto Improvement 

MAT formulates cooperative MARL as a sequential decision process with a fixed action generation order. This introduces order - dependent bias: the advantage function for leading agents incorrectly incorporates the influence of subsequent agents, leading to possible convergence to Pareto -suboptimal Nash equilibria (see Figure 2 in the main paper). CMAT avoids this by conditioning all agents on a shared consensus c, eliminating any dependence on an arbitrary order. Moreover, because ΠCMAT 

strictly contains ΠMAT , the optimal policy within CMAT’s policy class is at least as good as (and often strictly better than) that within MAT’s policy class. 

E.7 Relation to Existing Convergence Results 

The above insights are supported by recent theoretical advances: 20 • Tabular softmax policy gradient converges globally at a sublinear rate [64; 65]. • Multi -agent policy gradient converges to Nash equilibria in cooperative Markov games under tabular assumptions [66; 20]. • PPO variants have been shown to converge in both tabular and linear approximation settings [70; 71]. • Stackelberg equilibria in Markov games can be learned via bilevel reinforcement learning [ 67 ; 72 ]. 

E.8 Limitations 

The analysis relies on tabular assumptions that do not hold for our deep network implementation. Proving convergence for CMAT with neural function approximation remains open. Nevertheless, the structural advantages identified here (order independence, a strictly richer policy space, and a principled alternating optimisation scheme) are reflected in the strong empirical performance reported in Section 4, consistent with prior works where tabular analyses guided successful deep algorithms [13; 27]. 

# F Discussions 

In this section, we discuss several limitations of this work and outline promising directions for future research. First, although this paper addresses the fully cooperative setting with global observation, a scenario relevant to real-world smart city applications such as ride-hailing, traffic signal control, and power system management, our experiments are conducted solely on common MARL game testbeds. Future work should investigate the effectiveness of the proposed method in more practical, large-scale tasks. Second, as noted in [ 60 ], while the centralized paradigm leveraged in our approach achieves strong performance by exploiting global information, it also raises concerns regarding communication overhead and vulnerability to single-point failures. Incorporating communication-efficient mechanisms presents a valuable direction for enhancing the robustness and scalability of our method. Finally, given the remarkable generalization capabilities demonstrated by Transformers in large language models, future research could explore the potential of our approach in few-shot learning and other transfer learning scenarios, thereby broadening its applicability across tasks with limited data. 21