Title: Relational Preference Encoding in Looped Transformer Internal States

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09870v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 00:19:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Relational Preference Encoding in Looped Transformer Internal States 

## Jan Kirin April 2026 

Abstract 

We investigate how looped transformers encode human preference in their internal iteration states. Using Ouro-2.6B-Thinking, a 2.6B-parameter looped transformer with iterative refinement, we extract hidden states from each loop iteration and train lightweight evaluator heads ( ∼5M parameters) to predict human preference on the Anthropic HH-RLHF dataset. Our pairwise evaluator achieves 95.2% test accuracy on 8,552 unseen examples — surpassing the ceiling established by a full-batch L-BFGS probe (84.5%), itself a lower bound on linearly extractable preference signal rather than a true theoretical ceiling — while the 2.6B-parameter base model remains completely frozen. Our central finding is that loop states encode preference predominantly relationally : a linear probe on pairwise differences achieves 84.5%, the best nonlinear independent evaluator reaches only 65% test accuracy, and linear independent classification scores 21.75% (below chance, with inverted polarity). Interpreted precisely, the evaluator functions as a model-internal consistency probe — measuring how stably Ouro’s own learned value system organises its representations, rather than how well it predicts noisy human annotations; a 95.2% consistency with a model’s internalized values is a fundamentally different claim from 95.2% agreement with external annotators. We document the systematic architecture search — nine distinct architectures, nineteen evaluated configurations, three loss functions, two dataset scales — that established a genuine 70% ceiling for independent (pointwise) scoring, and show how the 50% argument-swap protocol essential to preventing degenerate pairwise solutions deflated pairwise training metrics by ∼31 points at peak, creating the false appearance that pairwise and pointwise evaluators shared the same ceiling. This metric deflation went undetected across seven pairwise training runs and its resolution constitutes a methodological finding in its own right. We further demonstrate that the cosine learning rate schedule’s dead zone at epoch 2 accidentally functioned as early stopping, preserving the generalisation peak before overfitting degraded test accuracy from 95.2% to 62.4% by epoch 5 — while the deflated training metric monotonically increased throughout, actively rewarding the degradation. Cross-epoch flip test analysis reveals that antisymmetry correlation (ρ = −0.92 to −0.97 ) is stable across all epochs while strict sign flip rate tracks scorer bias rather than preference learning, establishing correlation as the robust primary metric for pairwise evaluator antisymmetry. We further propose the flip test as a mandatory diagnostic for pairwise preference evaluators and demonstrate a degenerate failure mode — yielding 100% accuracy through constant output — that standard accuracy metrics cannot detect. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models increasingly use iterative internal computation to refine outputs. Looped transformers — architectures that pass hidden states through the same transformer block multiple times — produce a sequence of intermediate states that capture the model’s evolving internal representation. A natural question arises: do these intermediate loop states carry information about human preference? If a frozen language model’s internal dynamics encode comparative preference signal, this signal could be 1

> arXiv:2604.09870v1 [cs.LG] 10 Apr 2026

extracted by a lightweight external evaluator without modifying the base model’s weights. Such a separable architecture would enable preference monitoring as an interpretable, independently trainable module. This work makes several contributions: 1. We demonstrate that Ouro-2.6B-Thinking’s loop iteration states encode human preference predominantly relationally — pairwise access achieves 95.2% test accuracy while the best independent scorer reaches 65% — establishing a previously undocumented property of looped transformer representations. 2. We achieve 95.2% test accuracy from a completely frozen 2.6B-parameter model with only ∼5M trainable evaluator parameters, surpassing the 84.5% ceiling of an L-BFGS probe on the same features — itself a lower bound on linearly extractable signal, not a true theoretical ceiling — and demonstrating that the probe underestimated the extractable preference signal. 3. We document how a misleading training metric — caused by the antisymmetry enforcement protocol essential to preventing degenerate solutions — masked the pairwise model’s actual capability for seven consecutive runs, with the deflated metric inversely correlated with actual test performance across epochs. 4. We show that the cosine schedule’s learning rate dead zone at epoch 2 accidentally preserved the generali-sation peak: test accuracy rose from 83.3% (epoch 1) to 95.2% (epoch 2) then degraded to 62.4% (epoch 5) as the LR recovered and overfitting resumed, while the deflated training metric climbed monotonically from 60% to 69.9%. 5. We propose the flip test as a general diagnostic for pairwise evaluators and show through cross-epoch analysis that antisymmetry correlation is the robust primary metric — stable at ρ = −0.92 to −0.97 across all epochs — while strict sign flip rate reflects scorer bias magnitude rather than genuine order sensitivity. 6. We demonstrate that nonlinear feature construction (attention pooling + GRU) constructs rather than destroys the preference signal, exceeding both the L-BFGS probe and end-to-end reward model baselines. 

Concurrent work. Anthropic’s interpretability team recently reported that Claude Sonnet 4.5 contains 171 functional emotion-related internal representations that causally drive model behavior [Anthropic, 2026]. Their finding that abstract internal states are structured, extractable, and behaviorally consequential parallels our finding that loop states encode preference in relational geometric form. Both demonstrate that LLM internal representations carry preference-relevant information accessible to lightweight external methods. Our work extends this line of inquiry to iterative architectures and preference encoding specifically. 

# 2 Background 

## 2.1 Looped Transformers 

Unlike standard transformers that process input through a fixed stack of distinct layers, looped transformers reuse the same transformer block across multiple iterations. At each iteration t, the model produces hidden states ht that incorporate information from all previous iterations. Ouro-2.6B-Thinking implements this with an early-exit mechanism controlled by a confidence threshold, producing up to 4 loop iteration states per input. Ouro is, to our knowledge, the only publicly released looped transformer with documented architecture, open weights, and accessible per-iteration hidden states at a scale suitable for preference learning research. Universal Transformers [Dehghani et al., 2019] established the theoretical framework but no large-scale public checkpoints exist. Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQ; Bai et al. 2019) share the weight-tying principle but their fixed-point formulation makes per-iteration state extraction structurally different — the intermediate states are 2solver steps toward a fixed point rather than semantically distinct reasoning iterations. Adaptive Computation Time models [Graves, 2016] are similarly unavailable at scale with open weights. The single-model scope of this work is therefore not a choice but a reflection of what the field currently makes available: the experiment is only possible on Ouro. Cross-architecture replication awaits the release of comparable models. 

## 2.2 Preference Learning from Representations 

Standard reward models for RLHF are trained end-to-end: the base model’s representations adapt jointly with the reward head. Our approach differs fundamentally — the base model is completely frozen, and only a lightweight evaluator ( ∼5M parameters) is trained on extracted hidden states. This tests whether preference information is already present in the model’s natural representations, rather than whether it can be trained into them. 

## 2.3 The Anthropic HH-RLHF Dataset 

We use the Anthropic HH-RLHF dataset [Bai et al., 2022] containing paired human conversations where annotators identified a “chosen” (preferred) and “rejected” response. The dataset contains approximately 161k training pairs and 8,552 test pairs. Human annotator disagreement is estimated at 25–30%. Standard end-to-end reward models on the full dataset achieve 72–75% accuracy. 

# 3 Method 

## 3.1 Feature Extraction 

We register a forward hook on Ouro-2.6B-Thinking’s model backbone ( model.model ). The hook captures 

output[1] , which contains a list of 4 tensors of shape [batch, seq len, 2048] in bfloat16 — one per loop iteration. We verified through structural analysis that these are genuine loop iteration states, not layer outputs or attention weights: all 4 tensors share the same dimensionality, and their values differ across iterations in ways consistent with iterative refinement. All experiments were conducted on a single consumer GPU (RTX 5070 Ti, 12GB VRAM). The base model is kept completely frozen throughout — a deliberate methodological choice that directly tests whether preference information already exists in Ouro’s natural representations, rather than whether it can be trained into them. This approach also makes evaluator training feasible without cluster access: there is no need to backpropagate through 2.6B parameters, and the entire pipeline runs on consumer hardware. Chunk-sequential feature loading caps peak RAM at approximately 300MB per chunk regardless of dataset size. Feature extraction for the 50,000 training examples used in this work produced approximately 360GB of raw hidden states stored on an external SSD, requiring approximately 15 hours of continuous extraction time — extraction of the full 161k dataset would require roughly 1.1TB of storage and proportionally more extraction time, placing it at the practical boundary of consumer hardware. The 50k training set therefore reflects a genuine hardware ceiling rather than an arbitrary choice, and the strong results obtained within it suggest the approach scales well before hitting that ceiling. Each conversation is tokenized with a maximum length of 1024 tokens and left-padded. Left-padding is chosen deliberately: it ensures response tokens — where the preference signal is concentrated — are always at the right end of the sequence, while padding tokens at the left are zeroed out by the attention mask. Right-padding would bury response tokens under padding, diluting the attention pooling’s ability to focus on the signal-bearing region. The model’s early-exit threshold is set to 0.87, down from the default of 1.0. At the default, the early-exit gate is effectively disabled — the model always runs all 4 loop steps regardless 3of confidence. Setting the threshold to 0.87 enables adaptive computation: empirically, simple factual queries complete in approximately 10 seconds while complex multi-step reasoning takes up to 2.5 minutes, confirming the gate is functioning as intended. All features used in this work were extracted under this adaptive configuration. For each example, we extract loop states for both the chosen and rejected responses independently, storing them in float16 with corresponding attention masks. We extract features for 50,000 training examples, stored as chunked .pt files (100 examples per chunk) for memory-efficient training. This decoupling of extraction from training reduced experiment iteration time from hours to minutes per run. 

## 3.2 Implementation Notes 

Ouro-2.6B-Thinking requires transformers==4.54.1 . Versions 4.56.0 and above introduce a breaking change: the parent Cache class redefines key cache as a property with no setter, which conflicts with Ouro’s UniversalTransformerCache implementation. This causes a runtime error on the first forward pass. The fix requires adding explicit property accessors to a patched model file ( modeling ouro patched.py ); loading the model from the unpatched hub files on a newer transformers install will silently fail or crash. Researchers replicating this work should pin transformers to 4.54.1 or apply the property accessor patch before upgrading. Additionally, output hidden states=True does not expose Ouro’s loop-specific hidden states through the standard HuggingFace interface. A forward hook on model.model is required:         

> captured = {}
> def hook_fn(module, input ,output): captured["hidden_states_list"] = [h.detach() for hin output[1]] model.model.register_forward_hook(hook_fn)

output[1] contains the list of 4 per-loop-iteration hidden state tensors. output[0] is the standard 

BaseModelOutputWithPast and does not contain loop states. 

## 3.3 Diagnostic Probes 

Before training evaluators, we conduct three diagnostic analyses to characterize the preference signal in the raw representations. 

Pairwise linear probe. We compute the difference between mean-pooled chosen and rejected hidden states, then train a logistic regression classifier (L-BFGS optimizer, full batch) to distinguish chosen -rejected from rejected - chosen . On 1,000 examples (400 test pairs), this probe achieves 84.5% 

accuracy on final loop state features and 86.25% on all-states-concatenated features. This establishes a lower bound on linearly separable preference signal in pairwise differences — not an upper bound on what nonlinear evaluators can achieve, as the final results demonstrate. 

Independent classification probe. We train a logistic regression to classify individual response represen-tations as “chosen” or “rejected” without access to the paired response. This probe achieves 21.75% —below the 50% chance level, with inverted polarity (flipped: 78.25%). This below-chance result was the pivotal diagnostic finding: it revealed that preference is not encoded as an absolute property of individual representations. 

Structural shortcut analysis. On 500 test examples, we measure whether surface features separate chosen from rejected: sequence length (chosen mean=156.7, rejected mean=169.2 tokens; “longer=chosen”: 45.6%), hidden state norms (“larger norm=chosen”: 43.0%), and mean activation ratios ( ∼0.997 across all loop 4steps). No structural shortcut is found. The preference signal resides in representation geometry, not surface statistics. 

## 3.4 Evaluator Architectures 

We test nine architectures spanning three design paradigms. 

Pointwise evaluators score each response independently. The best-performing variant (V2) uses learned attention pooling over tokens (low-rank projection to 128-dim, learned query vector, masked softmax weighting), LayerNorm, projection to 512-dim, 2-layer GRU over the sequence of 4 projected loop states, a skip connection from the final projected state, and a 2-layer scorer MLP. Total: ∼4.7M parameters. 

Pairwise evaluator. A shared AttentionPool processes both chosen and rejected at each loop step. Per-step dif-ference vectors ( chosen pooled - rejected pooled ) are normalized with LayerNorm( bias=False )to preserve antisymmetry, projected to 512-dim, and fed through a 2-layer GRU. A skip connection from the final projected difference is concatenated with the GRU output, and a scorer outputs a single scalar: positive indicates the first argument is preferred. This is the architecture that achieves 95.2% test accuracy at epoch 2. 

Calibrated evaluator. Identical architecture to V2, trained with combined ranking and binary cross-entropy classification loss. 

Linear evaluator. Single nn.Linear(8192, 1) on concatenated mean-pooled loop states. 8,193 parameters. No nonlinearities. This serves as a direct comparison to the L-BFGS probe, testing whether the optimizer (L-BFGS vs Adam) or the access pattern (pairwise vs independent) accounts for the accuracy gap. 

## 3.5 Training Protocol 

All evaluators are trained on precomputed features using AdamW ( weight decay=0.01 ) with gradi-ent clipping ( max norm=1.0 ). The pairwise evaluator uses learning rate 10 −4 with cosine annealing (eta min= 10 −6), 200-step linear warmup, and batch size 32 in float32 precision. 

Antisymmetry enforcement. The pairwise evaluator requires a protocol to prevent degenerate solutions (Section 4.3). Each training batch undergoes a random 50% swap: with probability 0.5, the chosen and rejected inputs are swapped and the target becomes −1 instead of +1 . The loss is -logsigmoid(target * score) plus L2 score regularization ( 10 −4 · score 2). This protocol is essential but has a significant side effect on reported training metrics, discussed in Section 4.4. 

# 4 Results 

## 4.1 Test Accuracy: 95.2% at Epoch 2 

The pairwise evaluator achieves 95.2% accuracy on the full HH-RLHF test set (8,552 examples) at the epoch 2 checkpoint, evaluated with live Ouro model inference on unseen data. Chosen responses are always presented as the first argument; a positive score indicates correct preference prediction. 5Metric Value 

Test accuracy 95.2% (8,141 / 8,552) Average score +1 .6445 

Score std 0.9972 

Score range [−1.51 , +4 .56] 

Positive rate 95.2% Table 1: Summary statistics for the epoch 2 pairwise evaluator on the full HH-RLHF test set. This result exceeds the L-BFGS probe ceiling (84.5%) by 10.7 percentage points and substantially exceeds both the best pointwise evaluator (65% test) and standard end-to-end reward models trained on the full 161k dataset (72–75%). The model achieves this with ∼5M trainable parameters on a completely frozen 2.6B-parameter base model, trained on only 50k of the available 161k examples. The epoch 2 checkpoint is the reported model throughout this paper; the epoch-dependence of results is discussed in Section 4.4. 

On the plausibility of 95.2%. A result above the standard reward model ceiling ( ∼75%) and above the estimated annotator agreement floor ( ∼70–75%) warrants direct explanation rather than leaving it implicit. A critical framing note first: the evaluator is best understood as a model-internal consistency probe — it measures how stably Ouro’s own learned value system organises its representations, not how well it predicts noisy human annotations. A 95.2% consistency with a model’s own internalized values is a fundamentally different claim from 95.2% agreement with external annotators — and a considerably less surprising one. Three further factors compound to make 95.2% reachable without violating any theoretical constraints. First, the annotator disagreement estimate of 25–30% describes the noise in the marginal label distribution — it does not bound the accuracy of a pairwise evaluator that sees both responses simultaneously. A pairwise model can resolve many ambiguous cases by comparing representations directly, where a pointwise model scoring each response independently cannot. Second, Ouro-2.6B-Thinking was itself trained on human preference data; its representations are not preference-neutral. The evaluator is reading internal states from a model that already encodes human value judgments, not from a randomly initialised network. Third, the error analysis below reveals that approximately half of the 4.8% “errors” are cases where the evaluator’s preference diverges from the human label in safety-sensitive cases — particularly prompts where annotators labeled a harmful response as “chosen” and the evaluator preferred the refusal. These are not evaluator failures in any clear sense; they reflect disagreement between Ouro’s internal comparative signal and noisy HH-RLHF annotations. Under a strict interpretation, 95.2% overstates the evaluator’s agreement with human annotators while potentially understating its agreement with Ouro’s own trained preferences. 

Error analysis. Manual inspection of 30 examples where the evaluator disagrees with the human label reveals two dominant patterns. First, approximately 12–15 of the 30 errors involve safety-sensitive prompts (requests for violence, theft, illegal activity) where the human-labeled “chosen” response engages with the harmful request while the “rejected” response appropriately refuses or redirects — and the evaluator prefers the refusal. For example, in one case the “chosen” response provides instructions for ATM robbery while the “rejected” response asks clarifying questions; in another, the “chosen” response explains carjacking while the “rejected” redirects constructively. In these cases the evaluator’s preference diverges from the human label in the direction of refusing harmful requests — consistent with Ouro’s own RLHF-trained preferences rather than a genuine evaluator failure. Second, approximately 8–10 errors involve near-identical response pairs with negligible quality differences, where the evaluator’s score is near zero ( |score | < 0.15 ) — consistent with genuine label noise on ambiguous examples. Fewer than 5 of the 30 inspected errors represent cases where the evaluator is unambiguously wrong. This suggests the 95.2% accuracy may understate the model’s actual 6preference discrimination: a substantial fraction of the 4.8% “error” rate reflects label noise and debatable annotations rather than evaluator failures. The 4.8% is not a ceiling on the evaluator’s accuracy — it is partly a ceiling on the dataset’s label quality. 

## 4.2 Relational vs. Absolute Preference Encoding 

The core finding is the stark asymmetry between pairwise and independent access to preference information: 

Access Pattern Method Accuracy Pairwise, nonlinear (Adam, ep2) GRU + AttentionPool evaluator 95.2% test 

Pairwise, linear (L-BFGS) Logistic regression on differences 84.5% Independent, nonlinear (Adam) GRU + AttentionPool (pointwise V2) 65% test Independent, linear (Adam) nn.Linear on concat. features 64% train Independent, linear (L-BFGS) Logistic regression on single response 21.75% Table 2: Preference prediction accuracy by access pattern and method. Pairwise access consistently dominates independent access by at least 19 points across all model classes and optimizers. See Figure 1. Pairwise access substantially outperforms independent access across every condition tested: 84–95% vs 21–65% across all model classes and optimizers, a gap of at minimum 19 points. The nonlinear pairwise evaluator also exceeds the linear pairwise probe by 10.7 points — the probe was a lower bound, not a ceiling. 

Figure 1: Preference prediction accuracy by access pattern and method. The gap between pairwise and independent access is consistent across linear and nonlinear classifiers. The nonlinear pairwise evaluator exceeds the L-BFGS probe ceiling (dotted line), demonstrating that the probe underestimated the extractable signal. We cannot categorically exclude that a sufficiently expressive nonlinear independent classifier could match the 7pairwise results — the independent pointwise evaluators may simply be insufficiently expressive rather than fundamentally limited by the representations. However, the consistent gap across both linear and nonlinear classifiers, across both first-order and second-order optimizers, constitutes strong evidence that preference is 

predominantly accessible via relational comparisons under all tested conditions . We term this relational preference accessibility , using “accessibility” to reflect that the claim is about what evaluator architectures can extract rather than an assertion about how the representations are structured internally. The independent probe’s below-chance performance (21.75%, flipped: 78.25%) is the sharpest evidence for this conclusion. It admits several interpretations: inverted polarity in activation patterns, label imbalance effects, or systematic representation differences between chosen and rejected responses. Our structural shortcut analysis rules out simple surface confounds (length, norms), but the exact mechanism — and whether it reflects a fundamental geometric property or a training artifact of Ouro’s RLHF fine-tuning — warrants further investigation. 

## 4.3 Degenerate Pairwise Solutions and the Flip Test 

A pairwise model can achieve 100% accuracy while learning nothing. 

This is not a theoretical concern. Our initial pairwise evaluator achieved 100% accuracy on both training and test sets by learning to output a constant score of approximately +13 for every input pair regardless of content. Every training objective was satisfied. Every held-out evaluation passed. The model had learned nothing about preference. Accuracy, loss, and margin distributions all appeared healthy — the only thing that exposed the failure was swapping the input order and checking whether scores changed sign. The broader implication: any pairwise evaluator trained without explicit antisymmetry enforcement is vulnerable to this collapse. The flip test is not optional. 

Root cause. The loss function -logsigmoid(score) only pushed scores positive. Training always presented chosen first. The model discovered that a large positive constant minimizes loss perfectly. Lay-erNorm’s bias term absorbed sign information from the difference computation, and no L2 regularization constrained score magnitude. 

The flip test. Swap input order and verify that scores change sign. A genuine model should satisfy approximate antisymmetry: f (A, B ) ≈ − f (B, A ). The degenerate model produced:       

> Example 1: Normal=+13.16 |Flipped=+13.05 Example 2: Normal=+13.53 |Flipped=+13.45

The model was a constant function. We recommend the flip test as a mandatory validation step for any pairwise preference evaluator before results are reported — not as a quality check, but as a basic sanity check that the model is doing anything at all. 

Fix. Three modifications resolved the degeneracy: (1) random 50% swap of argument order during training with corresponding target sign flip, (2) directional loss -logsigmoid(target * score) , and (3) L2 score regularization. Removing the bias from the input LayerNorm ( bias=False ) additionally enforces architectural antisymmetry: LN (−x) = −LN (x).

A note on training dynamics under degeneracy. We did not instrument this run with per-batch checkpoint-ing, so we cannot characterize its early trajectory empirically. What the results establish is the end state: a constant function that passes both train and test evaluation and fails only the flip test. 

Cross-epoch flip test analysis. Running the flip test across all five training epochs reveals that antisymmetry 8correlation ( ρ) is stable throughout training while strict sign flip rate and scorer bias are not (Figure 2). Correlation ranges from −0.92 to −0.97 across all epochs — including epochs 4 and 5 where test accuracy has collapsed to 67.2% and 62%. Strict sign flip rate meanwhile ranges from 25% (epoch 2, peak accuracy) to 96% (epochs 4–5, overfit). This inverse relationship between sign flip rate and accuracy is explained by scorer bias: at peak accuracy (epoch 2), the model is maximally confident, mean scores are high ( +1 .64 ), and the scorer’s learned positive offset prevents most flipped scores from going negative despite strong order sensitivity. As overfitting progresses, confidence and scores decrease, the bias dissipates, and sign flip rate recovers to 96% — but preference discrimination has degraded. The bias tracks model confidence, not accuracy per se: both accuracy and bias are downstream of the same underlying property — how cleanly the model has learned the preference signal. Strict sign flip rate is therefore an unreliable antisymmetry diagnostic when scorer bias is large. Correlation is the robust primary metric. A model with ρ = −0.94 and 25% sign flip rate (epoch 2) is more genuinely antisymmetric than the naive flip rate suggests; a model with ρ = −0.96 and 96% sign flip rate (epoch 4) is not more genuinely antisymmetric — it simply has less bias. 

Flip test on the reported model (epoch 2). On 100 test examples, the evaluator exhibits strong order sensitivity ( ρ = −0.94 ): when scores are high in the canonical ordering, they are consistently lower under input reversal. The strict sign-flip rate is 25%, with the gap attributable to a positive bias offset in the scoring function: the mean sum of normal and flipped scores is +2 .51 rather than ∼0, shifting low-confidence comparisons above zero in both directions. High-confidence comparisons ( |score | > 0.9) exhibit correct antisymmetric behavior consistently. The model is not degenerate — scores span [−1.51 , +4 .56] and vary meaningfully with input. This pattern indicates that the evaluator has learned a strongly antisymmetric relational signal, with deviations arising from a global bias term rather than a failure of order sensitivity. Enforcing strict antisymmetry (e.g., removing scorer bias terms) may reduce the offset but could impact overall accuracy. 

Figure 2: Cross-epoch flip test analysis. Left: Antisymmetry correlation ( ρ) is stable at −0.92 to −0.97 

across all five epochs. Centre: Strict sign flip rate ranges from 25% (epoch 2, peak accuracy) to 96% (epochs 4–5, overfit) — inversely tracking accuracy. Right: Scorer bias (mean sum of normal and flipped scores) peaks at +2 .51 at epoch 2 and dissipates to −0.37 by epoch 5, confirming that sign flip rate measures bias rather than genuine order sensitivity. Correlation is the stable, reliable antisymmetry metric; sign flip rate and scorer bias are properties of training dynamics, not preference learning. 94.4 The Perceived 70% Ceiling and the LR Dead Zone: A Methodological Cautionary Tale 

The pointwise V2 evaluator genuinely reached 70% training accuracy and 65% test accuracy. This was a real ceiling for independent scoring — consistent across architectures (V1: 62%, V2 with mean pool: 68%, V2 with attention pool: 70%, no-GRU: 68%, calibrated: 69%). The representations encode preference relationally, so independent scoring has a genuine upper bound. The misconception began when we introduced the pairwise evaluator. After fixing the degenerate +13 failure (Section 4.3), the corrected pairwise model — trained with 50% argument swapping — reported training accuracies of 70%. This appeared to confirm the same ceiling: “even seeing both responses doesn’t help.” We spent the subsequent seven days and eight training runs trying to break this apparent ceiling by scaling data (25k → 50k), increasing batch sizes (EBS 8 → 64), changing learning rate schedules (cosine, constant, warmup-constant-decay), modifying architectures (pre-diff-norm, separate anchor projections), and extending training (3 → 5 epochs). Everything hit 70%. 

The resolution was trivial. The 50% argument-swap protocol deflates reported training accuracy for pairwise models specifically. At each step, the model must predict the correct sign ( +1 or −1) based on which ordering was randomly sampled. The running accuracy blends performance on the easier direction (chosen first) with the harder direction (rejected first), producing a metric that understates actual preference discrimination. The pointwise evaluators — which do not use the swap protocol — reported accurate training metrics throughout. When we ran the held-out test evaluation with a fixed ordering (chosen always first, score > 0 = correct), the pairwise model achieved 83.3% at epoch 1 and 95.2% at epoch 2. The gap between reported training accuracy (60–64%) and actual test performance (83–95%) had been present from the first valid pairwise run but went undetected because we assumed the pairwise training metric was comparable to the pointwise training metric. Antisymmetry enforcement protocols in pairwise models deflate training metrics relative to pointwise models trained on the same task — a methodological pitfall that went undetected across seven training runs. Researchers using swap-based pairwise training should evaluate on held-out data with a fixed ordering to obtain comparable performance estimates. The genuine pointwise ceiling (70% train / 65% test) and the genuine pairwise performance (95.2% test at epoch 2) are both real — what was illusory was their apparent convergence. 

The LR dead zone as accidental early stopping. The cosine annealing schedule produces a learning rate dead zone at epoch 2: LR is too high for fine-tuning but too low to escape the current loss basin, effectively freezing weight updates. This means epoch 2 evaluates approximately the same weights as epoch 1, having learned the general preference signal in epoch 1 before the LR became pathological. The result is that the dead zone accidentally functioned as early stopping — preserving the peak generalisation performance before the LR recovered in epoch 3 and overfitting resumed. Test accuracy rose from 83.3% (epoch 1) to 95.2% (epoch 2), then degraded to 89.5% (epoch 3), 67.2% (epoch 4), and 62.4% (epoch 5) as overfitting to training artifacts — swap directions, chunk orderings, label noise — progressively destroyed generalisation. 

The deflation actively rewards degradation. The deflated training metric climbed monotonically from 60% (epoch 1) to 69.9% (epoch 5) throughout this degradation. A researcher relying on training accuracy for early stopping would have saved the epoch 5 checkpoint — the worst performing model — as the best. This makes the deflated metric not merely uninformative but actively dangerous. Early stopping based on held-out evaluation is essential; training accuracy cannot serve as a proxy for pairwise models with swap-based training. 10 Epoch Deflated Train Acc Actual Test Acc Relationship 

1 60% 83.3% Genuine signal learned 2 64% 95.2% LR dead zone preserves peak 3 67% 89.5% LR recovers, overfitting begins 4 69% 67.2% Cliff: training artifacts memorised 5 69.9% 62.4% Floor: approaching pointwise ceiling Table 3: Deflated training accuracy vs. actual test accuracy across all five epochs. The training metric climbs monotonically while test accuracy peaks at the LR dead zone and collapses. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3: Swap-protocol metric inversion across five epochs. The deflated training metric (blue) climbs monotonically from 60% to 69.9% while actual test accuracy (red) peaks at 95.2% at the LR dead zone (green band) and collapses to 62.4% by epoch 5. By epoch 5, the checkpoint the training metric would select achieves 62.4% test accuracy — 32.8 points below the epoch 2 peak. 

## 4.5 Architecture Search Results 

The architecture search produced several findings that survive the deflation artefact. Table 4 shows training accuracy across all configurations, along with test accuracy where evaluated. 11 Architecture Train Acc Test Acc Key Finding                                               

> V1 MLP concat 62.0% 61.9% Baseline V2 GRU + mean pool 68.0% 63.0% Mean pooling V2 GRU + AttentionPool(128) 70.0% 65.0% Best pointwise V2 AttentionPool(2048) 53.0% —Full-rank collapse No-GRU AttentionPool + MLP 68.0% —No temporal model Pairwise v1 (25k) 70.0% —First valid pairwise Pairwise v1 (50k) 70.0% —2x data scale Pairwise v1 (50k, EBS=64) 70.0% —8x batch size Calibrated (ranking + BCE) 69.0% —Combined loss Linear (single layer, Adam) 64.0% —No compression Pairwise v2 (pre-diff-norm) 68.0% —Regressed Pairwise v1 (AMP, 5 epochs) 70.0% —AMP unstable Pairwise v1 (fp32, epoch 1) 60.0% 83.3% Early checkpoint
> Pairwise v1 (fp32, epoch 2) 64.0% 95.2% Best model
> Pairwise v1 (fp32, epoch 5) 69.9% 62.4% Overfit: train ↑test ↓

Table 4: Training and test accuracy across architectures. For pointwise models (rows 1–5), training accuracy is directly comparable to test accuracy. For pairwise models with swap protocol (rows 6–15), training accuracy is deflated and inverts with overfitting: the epoch 2 checkpoint (64% train) outperforms the epoch 5 checkpoint (70% train) on test by 32.8 points. A few findings from the search merit particular attention: 

Compression helps, not hurts. The linear evaluator (single nn.Linear(8192, 1) , Adam optimizer) achieved 64% — six points below the compressed V2 architecture (70% training). The GRU and attention pooling perform nonlinear feature construction that makes the distributed, non-axis-aligned preference signal accessible to the downstream scorer. 

Attention pooling rank matters. Full-rank attention pooling (2048-dim, 4.2M parameters in pooling alone) collapsed to 53% due to overfitting. Low-rank (128-dim, 262K parameters) forced the pooling layer to learn structural weighting patterns rather than memorizing token-level features. This is the correct place to regularize: the bottleneck restricts the complexity of the token-weighting decision without restricting what the evaluator uses after pooling, since the full 2048-dimensional pooled vector is still passed forward. Mean pooling, by contrast, treats prompt tokens and response tokens with equal weight — a structural bias against the preference signal, which is concentrated in the response portion of the sequence. 

Temporal modeling contributes modestly. The GRU adds approximately 2 points when paired with attention pooling (68% → 70%) and 0 points with mean pooling. The dominant signal is in the final loop state: the probe achieves 84.5% on the final state alone vs 86.25% on all states concatenated. 

Pre-diff-norm regresses. Normalizing each response independently before subtraction ( LN (c) − LN (r))regressed from 70% to 68%. The original approach ( LN (c − r)) preserves relative magnitude in the difference. 

AMP is unsuitable for this architecture. Mixed precision training caused severe mid-epoch accuracy crashes due to GradScaler interaction with the GRU’s small gradients (scores in the ±0.5 range). Float32 is required for stable training. 12 4.6 Structural Analysis 

No surface-level features explain the preference signal. Rejected responses are slightly longer than chosen ones (mean 169.2 vs 156.7 tokens), hidden state norms do not separate the classes (43% accuracy), and mean activation ratios are near unity ( ∼0.997) across all loop steps. The signal resides in the high-dimensional geometry of the representations, not in any single computable statistic. 

## 4.7 The Probe Ceiling, Revisited 

The L-BFGS probe ceiling of 84.5% was initially framed as a theoretical upper bound on extractable preference signal. The 95.2% result revises this picture: the probe established a lower bound on linearly separable preference signal from mean-pooled pairwise differences, not an upper bound on what is extractable. The evaluator exceeds the probe for three compounding reasons. First, attention pooling concentrates on response-bearing tokens rather than averaging uniformly — the probe’s mean pooling discards token-level structure that carries preference signal. Second, the GRU over difference trajectories extracts temporal patterns across loop steps that no linear classifier on pooled representations can access. Third, the evaluator trained on 50,000 examples while the probe fit 1,000 — the probe was itself data-limited relative to what the full training set allows. The remaining gap between probe (84.5%) and evaluator (95.2%) is therefore not an optimizer gap (L-BFGS vs Adam) but a feature construction gap (mean pooling vs attention pooling) combined with a data gap. 

# 5 Discussion 

## 5.1 What Relational Accessibility Means 

Under all tested conditions — linear and nonlinear classifiers, first-order and second-order optimizers, nine evaluator architectures — pairwise access to representations substantially outperforms independent access. The strongest independent scorer (V2 pointwise, 65% test) falls 30 points below the pairwise evaluator (95.2% test) despite using an identical architecture class. This is consistent with how language models are trained: next-token prediction does not require absolute quality judgments, only contextual coherence. Preference, being a human construct imposed during RLHF, may not naturally align with any absolute direction in representation space. Instead, the model’s represen-tations are structured such that chosen and rejected responses to the same prompt land in geometrically distinguishable regions — but this distinction is relational (requiring both representations for comparison) rather than absolute (classifiable from a single representation alone). We note that we cannot categorically exclude the existence of an absolute preference signal accessible to a more powerful independent classifier than those we tested. The claim is empirical: under our tested conditions, pairwise access dominates by a substantial margin. 

## 5.2 Implications for Alignment Monitoring 

Achieving 95.2% test accuracy from a frozen 2.6B-parameter model with ∼5M trainable parameters has significant practical implications. This substantially exceeds the 72–75% typically achieved by end-to-end reward models on the full 161k HH-RLHF dataset — despite using frozen representations, training on only 50k examples, and requiring no modification to the base model. 13 The result raises a question about the HH-RLHF noise ceiling. With 25–30% annotator disagreement, the theoretical maximum for any preference predictor on this dataset is bounded. A 95.2% result either indicates the noise ceiling estimate is conservative, that pairwise access allows the model to resolve cases that pointwise evaluators cannot, or both. This warrants evaluation on cleaner preference datasets to determine how much headroom remains. The result establishes strong feasibility for modular preference monitoring within Ouro specifically: a separable, lightweight component that reads the model’s internal loop states and extracts a comparative preference signal without modifying the model’s weights or behavior. Such a component could serve as a real-time preference signal during inference, an independent audit mechanism, or a training signal for downstream fine-tuning. 

## 5.3 Connection to Anthropic’s Emotion Concepts Research 

Anthropic’s concurrent finding of 171 functional emotion representations in Claude Sonnet 4.5 [Anthropic, 2026] demonstrates that large language models develop structured internal representations of abstract psycho-logical concepts that causally influence behavior. Their key finding — that “desperation” representations can drive unethical actions, and that emotion vectors predict and causally influence model preferences — is parallel to our work. Both share a core insight: LLM internal states carry structured, extractable signals about preference-relevant properties. Anthropic demonstrates this for emotion concepts in a standard transformer; we demonstrate it for comparative preference encoding in Ouro’s loop iteration states. Both find that these signals are functional (they predict behavioral outcomes) and geometric (organized as directions in representation space). The convergence of interpretability techniques [Anthropic, 2026, Templeton et al., 2024] and probing/evaluator methods (this work) on the same fundamental finding strengthens both lines of evidence. 

## 5.4 The Iterative Research Process 

The 95.2% result emerged through a process that included one genuine ceiling, one phantom ceiling, and an accidental discovery about learning rate schedules. 

Phase 1: Architecture search (Runs 1–7). Starting from a simple MLP baseline (62%), I progressively added components: mean pooling → attention pooling (+2%), GRU temporal modeling (+2%), skip connections. Full-rank attention pooling collapsed to 53%; low-rank (128-dim) became standard. The V2 architecture reached 70% train / 65% test — a genuine ceiling for independent scoring. 

Phase 2: Diagnosis. The scaled linear probe (84.5% pairwise, 21.75% independent) reframed the problem. The below-chance independent probe was the pivotal finding: preference is predominantly accessible relationally. 

Phase 3: Pairwise evaluator. The degenerate failure (100% accuracy, constant +13 ) motivated the swap protocol and flip test. The fixed pairwise evaluator reported 70% training accuracy — appearing to match the pointwise ceiling. 

Phase 4: The phantom ceiling (Runs 8–15). Believing that even pairwise access could not break 70%, I spent seven days testing data scaling (25k → 50k), batch size scaling (EBS 8 → 64), alternative schedules, and architecture variations. All pairwise runs reported ∼70%. I concluded the ceiling was representational. 

Phase 5: Resolution. Running the held-out test evaluation revealed 83.3% at epoch 1 — the swap protocol had been deflating pairwise training metrics by ∼13 points. 14 Phase 6: Epoch analysis. Evaluating all five checkpoints revealed the full picture: 95.2% at epoch 2, then monotonic degradation to 62.4% at epoch 5. The cosine schedule’s LR dead zone had accidentally preserved the generalisation peak. 

## 5.5 Future Work 

Phase 2: Joint training (LoRA + evaluator). Unfreezing Ouro’s later layers via low-rank adapters ( ∼10– 50M trainable parameters) while training the evaluator jointly would allow the representations to adapt to the preference scoring task. On consumer hardware (RTX 5070 Ti, 12GB VRAM), Ouro-2.6B in 4-bit quantization ( ∼1.5GB) with LoRA adapters is feasible. 

Phase 3: Basal ganglia integration. The evaluator currently operates as a passive measurement tool. The planned basal ganglia component would close this loop: the evaluator’s preference score feeds back into Ouro’s generation process during inference, enabling real-time alignment steering through gating, steering, or early-exit modulation. The basal ganglia metaphor is functional, not decorative — in neuroscience, the basal ganglia integrate reward signals with motor planning to select actions; this component would integrate preference signals with iterative refinement to select aligned outputs. 

Epistemic reasoning component. A parallel line of work explores whether similar internal-state extraction techniques can support epistemic reasoning — the model’s capacity to represent uncertainty, knowledge boundaries, and relational structure over abstract patterns. A natural target is the ARC-AGI-3 benchmark, where success requires systematic generalisation from few examples and adaptive world-model construction through interactive game environments. The current approach pairs the GridEncoder (patch-based tokenisation of 64 ×64 frames into Ouro’s 2048-dim token space) with a connectome-derived sparse recurrent architecture (Vesper) whose Dusk/Twilight/Dawn layers are initialised from FlyWire release 783 connectivity statistics, giving the agent a structural prior for sensorimotor processing before any training signal is applied. Ouro’s four loop states drive four recurrent steps in the Twilight layer, synchronising iterative linguistic refinement with iterative sensorimotor integration. The loop-state divergence across iterations — large when the agent is uncertain, small when representations have converged — is being investigated as a label-free epistemic uncertainty signal, analogous to how the evaluator here reads preference from loop-state geometry without modifying the base model. 

Toward modular alignment architectures (speculative hypothesis). The naming conventions in this work — “amygdala” for the evaluator, “basal ganglia” for the planned steering component — are functional analogies reflecting a design hypothesis: that separable, independently trainable modules for preference evaluation, action gating, and epistemic monitoring may be a productive organizational principle for alignment-aware architectures. This hypothesis is entirely speculative and empirically unvalidated at the systems level. The present work contributes one piece and makes no claim about the broader hypothesis beyond establishing that such modules are technically feasible and informative. 

Cross-architecture generality. All experiments use Ouro-2.6B-Thinking. Testing whether relational preference accessibility generalizes to other looped architectures and to non-looped models is critical future validation. 

## 5.6 Limitations 

Frozen representations. Our 95.2% reflects the signal available in Ouro’s natural representations, which were not trained for preference scoring. Unfreezing the base model via LoRA adapters is planned as Phase 2. 

Dataset noise and ceiling. HH-RLHF has an estimated 25–30% annotator disagreement rate. A 95.2% result pushes above the typical 72–75% ceiling for end-to-end reward models and warrants careful interpretation. 15 Epoch sensitivity. The 95.2% result is specific to the epoch 2 checkpoint. The cosine LR schedule’s dead zone accidentally preserved this peak; a different schedule may not reproduce this behavior. The optimal checkpoint must be identified via held-out evaluation. 

Scorer bias and antisymmetry. The epoch 2 model exhibits strong order sensitivity ( ρ = −0.94 ) but 25% strict sign flip rate due to a learned positive bias offset. This does not affect preference discrimination accuracy under consistent argument ordering but represents a known architectural limitation. 

Single base model. All experiments use Ouro-2.6B-Thinking. As discussed in Section 2.1, this is not an explorable gap — no comparable publicly available looped transformer exists. Cross-architecture replication awaits future model releases. 

Independent probe scope. We tested linear and nonlinear independent classifiers. The claim of predomi-nantly relational accessibility is bounded by tested conditions. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We demonstrate that a lightweight pairwise evaluator reading the internal loop states of a frozen 2.6B-parameter looped transformer achieves 95.2% test accuracy on human preference prediction — surpassing the L-BFGS probe ceiling by 10.7 points (itself a lower bound on linearly extractable signal rather than a true theoretical ceiling) and substantially above end-to-end reward model baselines. The finding that preference is predominantly accessible via relational comparisons between response representations, rather than as an absolute property of individual responses, characterizes a previously undocumented property of looped transformer internal states. The path to this result included a degenerate failure mode that achieved 100% accuracy through constant output, a genuine 70% ceiling for independent scoring, a seven-run investigation of a phantom pairwise ceiling caused by training metric deflation, and an accidental discovery that the cosine schedule’s LR dead zone at epoch 2 preserved the generalisation peak before overfitting degraded test accuracy from 95.2% to 62.4%. The finding that swap-based training deflates pairwise metrics by up to 31 points relative to fixed-ordering evaluation — with the deflated metric inversely correlated with actual test performance — constitutes a methodological contribution relevant to all pairwise preference learning systems. The cross-epoch flip test analysis further establishes that antisymmetry correlation is the robust primary metric for pairwise evaluator diagnostics, with strict sign flip rate reflecting scorer bias rather than genuine order sensitivity. These results, alongside Anthropic’s concurrent demonstration of functional internal representations in large language models, indicate that Ouro’s loop iteration states carry rich, structured information about comparative preference. Extracting this information through lightweight, separable evaluator components — and ultimately feeding it back into the generation process through modular steering mechanisms — represents a viable path for Ouro specifically, with generalization to other looped architectures awaiting replication on comparable models. 

# References 

Anthropic. Emotion concepts and their function in a large language model. Transformer Circuits Thread ,2026. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/emotion-features/index.html 

Bai, S., Kolter, J. Z., and Koltun, V. Deep Equilibrium Models. In NeurIPS , 2019. Bai, Y., et al. Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. 

arXiv:2204.05862 , 2022. 16 Christiano, P., et al. Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences. In NeurIPS , 2017. Dehghani, M., Gouws, S., Vinyals, O., Uszkoreit, J., and Kaiser, Ł. Universal Transformers. In ICLR , 2019. Graves, A. Adaptive Computation Time for Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv:1603.08983 , 2016. Maheswaran, A. and Desarkar, M. S. A Unified View on Emotion Representation in Large Language Models. In EACL , 2026. Ouyang, L., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS , 2022. Templeton, A., et al. Scaling Monosemanticity: Extracting Interpretable Features from Claude 3 Sonnet. 

Transformer Circuits Thread , 2024. Zhu, R., Wang, Z., Hua, K., Zhang, T., et al. Scaling Latent Reasoning via Looped Language Models. 

arXiv:2510.25741 , 2025. 

# A Evaluator Architecture Details 

## A.1 Attention Pooling       

> keys = Linear(2048 -> 128, bias=False)(hidden) scores = masked_softmax(keys @ query, attention_mask) pooled = weighted_sum(scores, hidden) -> [batch, 2048]

Low-rank projection (128-dim) prevents the pooling layer from memorizing token-level patterns. Full-rank (2048-dim) collapsed to 53% — 4.2M parameters in pooling alone caused overfitting. 

## A.2 Pairwise Evaluator Forward Pass                         

> For each loop step tin {1, ..., 4}: c_t = AttentionPool(chosen_states_t, chosen_mask) r_t = AttentionPool(rejected_states_t, rejected_mask) diff_t =c_t -r_t normed_t =LayerNorm(diff_t, bias=False) proj_t =Linear(normed_t) gru_out = GRU([proj_1, ..., proj_4])[-1] combined = concat(gru_out, proj_4) # skip connection score = Scorer(combined) # LN -> Linear -> GELU -> Dropout -> Linear -> scalar

Total parameters: ∼4.73M. Input LayerNorm uses bias=False to preserve antisymmetry: LN (−x) = 

−LN (x).

## A.3 The Flip Test Protocol 

For each test example: • score normal = f(chosen, rejected) 

• score flipped = f(rejected, chosen) 

17 Three metrics should be reported: (1) strict sign flip rate — fraction of examples where sign reverses, (2) antisymmetry correlation ρ between normal and flipped scores, and (3) mean sum ( score normal +score flipped ), which should be ∼0 for a perfectly antisymmetric model. The degenerate model produced score normal ≈ score flipped ≈ +13 , with correlation ≈ 0 and mean sum ≈ +26 . The epoch 2 reported model produces content-dependent scores spanning [−1.51 , +4 .56] 

with correlation ρ = −0.94 , 25% strict sign reversal, and mean sum +2 .51 attributable to scorer bias. The cross-epoch analysis (Figure 2) demonstrates that correlation is stable and informative while sign flip rate reflects scorer bias magnitude — correlation should be treated as the primary antisymmetry metric. 

## A.4 Training Metric Deflation and Inversion 

The 50% swap protocol reports accuracy as “does score sign match target?” where target is +1 or −1 with equal probability. This produces a metric deflated relative to actual preference discrimination accuracy, with the deflation magnitude varying by epoch. More critically, the metric inverts across epochs: epoch 2 shows 64% deflated / 95.2% test (peak generalisation), while epoch 5 shows 69.9% deflated / 62.4% test (maximum overfitting). The training metric increases monotonically as the model overfits, making it worse than uninformative — it actively signals improvement during degradation. Researchers using swap-based pairwise training must use held-out evaluation for both performance estimation and early stopping. 

# B Complete Architecture Search                                                                                                     

> #Architecture Params Train Test Key Finding
> 1MLP concat (V1) ∼2M 62.0% 61.9% Baseline 2GRU + mean pool (V2) ∼4.7M 68.0% 63.0% GRU helps 3GRU + AttentionPool(128) ∼4.7M 70.0% 65.0% Best pointwise 4GRU + AttentionPool(2048) ∼8.9M 53.0% —Full-rank collapse 5AttentionPool(256) + MLP ∼3.2M 68.0% —GRU adds 2pts 6AttentionPool(128) + MLP ∼3.0M 68.0% —Confirmed 7Pairwise (degenerate) ∼4.7M 100% 100% Flip test failure 8Pairwise v1 (25k) ∼4.7M 70.0% —First valid pairwise 9Pairwise v1 (50k) ∼4.7M 70.0% —Data scaling neutral 10 Pairwise v1 (EBS=64) ∼4.7M 70.0% —Batch scaling neutral 11 Calibrated (rank+BCE) ∼4.7M 69.0% —BCE adds nothing 12 Linear (Adam) 8,193 64.0% —Compression helps 13 Pairwise v2 (pre-diff-norm) ∼5.8M 68.0% —Regressed 2pts 14 Pairwise v1 (AMP, 5ep) ∼4.7M 70.0% —AMP unstable 15 Pairwise v1 (fp32, ep1) ∼4.7M 60.0% 83.3% Early checkpoint
> 16 Pairwise v1 (fp32, ep2) ∼4.7M 64.0% 95.2% Best model
> 17 Pairwise v1 (fp32, ep3) ∼4.7M 67.0% 89.5% Degrading 18 Pairwise v1 (fp32, ep4) ∼4.7M 69.0% 67.2% Cliff 19 Pairwise v1 (fp32, ep5) ∼4.7M 69.9% 62.4% Overfit floor

Table 5: Complete architecture search results. Training accuracies for pairwise models with swap protocol (rows 8–19) are deflated relative to actual preference discrimination accuracy. The epoch 2 checkpoint achieves 95.2% test accuracy against a deflated training metric of 64%, a gap of 31.2 points. 18 C Cross-Epoch Flip Test Results 

Epoch Test Acc Correlation ( ρ) Sign Flip Rate Mean Sum Bias 

1 83.3% −0.92 57% +1 .04 Moderate 2 95.2% −0.94 25% +2 .51 High 3 89.5% −0.97 44% +1 .64 Moderate 4 67.2% −0.96 96% −0.22 Near zero 5 62.4% −0.97 96% −0.37 Negative Table 6: Cross-epoch flip test results. Correlation is stable throughout ( −0.92 to −0.97 ), confirming that the antisymmetric relational signal is learned in epoch 1 and preserved regardless of overfitting. Sign flip rate and scorer bias track model confidence. The inverse relationship between sign flip rate and test accuracy confirms that sign flip rate measures scorer bias, not genuine order sensitivity. See Figure 2. 19