Title: MM-Doc-R1: Training Agents for Long Document Visual Question Answering through Multi-turn Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13579v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:38:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# MM-Doc-R1: Training Agents for Long Document Visual Question Answering through Multi-turn Reinforcement Learning 

Jiahang Lin 1‡*, Kai Hu 2∗, Binghai Wang 1, Yuhao Zhou 1, Zhiheng Xi 1,Honglin Guo 1, Shichun Liu 1, Junzhe Wang 1, Shihan Dou 1, Enyu Zhou 1,

Hang Yan 2, Zhenhua Han 2†, Tao Gui 1†, Qi Zhang 1, Xuanjing Huang 1

> 1

Fudan University, 2Shanghai Qiji Zhifeng Co., Ltd 

Abstract 

Conventional Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems often struggle with complex multi-hop queries over long documents due to their single-pass retrieval. We introduce 

MM-Doc-R1 , a novel framework that em-ploys an agentic, vision-aware workflow to address long document visual question an-swering through iterative information discov-ery and synthesis. To incentivize the infor-mation seeking capabilities of our agents, we propose Similarity-based Policy Optimiza-tion (SPO) , addressing baseline estimation bias in existing multi-turn reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms like GRPO. Our core insight is that in multi-turn RL, the more semanti-cally similar two trajectories are, the more accurate their shared baseline estimation be-comes. Leveraging this, SPO calculates a more precise baseline by similarity-weighted aver-aging of rewards across multiple trajectories, unlike GRPO which inappropriately applies the initial state’s baseline to all intermediate states. This provides a more stable and accurate learning signal for our agents, leading to supe-rior training performance that surpasses GRPO. Our experiments on the MMLongbench-Doc benchmark show that MM-Doc-R1 outper-forms previous baselines by 10.4% . Further-more, SPO demonstrates superior performance over GRPO , boosting results by 5.0% with Qwen3-8B and 6.1% with Qwen3-4B. These results highlight the effectiveness of our inte-grated framework and novel training algorithm in advancing the state-of-the-art for complex, long-document visual question answering. 

1 Introduction 

Long document visual question answering presents a challenging yet highly practical research prob-lem, primarily due to the difficulty of effectively 

> *

Equal contributions. ‡Work done during an internship at Shanghai Qiji Zhifeng Co., Ltd. †Corresponding authors: hzhua201@gmail.com, tgui@fudan.edu.cn. Extract     

> TOC LOOP Tool result Parser
> Markdown
> Picture
> Doc
> Read
> Search
> Retrieval Tool
> result:
> …
> QWEN2.5 -VL
> result:
> Query Planner Seeker
> Page ID:13
> Score:4.70
> Snippet: content_13
> Answer
> Call tool
> Page ID:72
> Score:3.82
> Snippet: content_72

MM -Doc -R1    

> Visual Elements
> summary:
> The image contains …
> Query -Relevant
> Information:
> The chart shows …

Figure 1: Introduction to MM-Doc-R1. MM-Doc-R1 employs a seeker for iterative key information retrieval within documents, leveraging a VLM (Visual Language Model) as a reading tool to ensure accurate processing of visual elements. 

identifying and extracting salient information from lengthy, multi-page documents (Van Landeghem et al., 2023; Appalaraju et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2024). Existing work is always based on Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), where textual or visual content is encoded into embeddings, and rel-evance is determined by similarity scores with re-spect to the original query (Peng et al., 2024; Lewis et al., 2020; Han et al., 2025). These approaches typically rely solely on the initial user query for re-trieval, which limits their effectiveness in handling multi-hop questions that require iterative informa-tion gathering across multiple document segments. To address the limitations of existing models in multi-turn information retrieval from documents, we propose MM-Doc-R1 , a novel framework that integrates a vision-aware long document question answering workflow with an end-to-end multi-turn reinforcement learning algorithm. As illustrated in Figure 1, our workflow comprises three spe-cialized agents. First, a planner generates an ini-tial information-seeking plan by parsing the docu-ment’s table of contents. Following this, a seeker acts as a tool-driven agent, performing multi-turn information retrieval through iterative interactions 

> arXiv:2604.13579v1 [cs.CL] 15 Apr 2026

with the document to gather relevant evidence. The seeker utilizes a “search” tool for text-based re-trieval and a “read” tool, powered by a vision-language model (VLM), to extract visual details from specific pages. This iterative decomposition of sub-questions and strategic tool invocation en-ables the seeker to precisely access relevant pages and retrieve accurate information. Finally, the col-lated relevant information is fed into an answer agent to generate the ultimate response. To en-hance the agents’ information-seeking capabilities and refine their decision-making throughout this iterative workflow, we employ Multi-turn Rein-forcement Learning to train our agents. In multi-turn reinforcement learning, GRPO (Song et al., 2025a,b) is commonly employed. It operates by first generating a com-plete trajectory through rollout and then computing the advantage as the difference between the total accumulated reward and a baseline. However, GRPO estimates this baseline only from the initial state’s rollout, which is then inappropriately applied to intermediate states. This introduces sig-nificant estimation bias in those intermediate steps. To tackle this problem, we are introducing SPO, a new multi-turn RL algorithm built on GRPO. Our core idea is this: the more semantically similar two trajectories are, the greater their overlap in intermediate states. This increased overlap directly leads to a more accurate baseline estimation. SPO capitalizes on this by weighting rewards based on trajectory similarity, yielding a more accurate and consistent baseline estimation. This enhanced baseline effectively reduces variance and guides the learning process toward more precise convergence, thereby significantly boosting the agent’s information-seeking ability in multi-turn RL training. Extensive experiments on the MMLongbench-doc benchmark demonstrate that our method, MM-Doc-R1 , outperforms previous RAG baselines by 

10.4% . Furthermore, our proposed SPO approach delivers substantial improvements over GRPO ,yielding a 6.1% performance increase with Qwen3-4B and a 5.0% performance increase with Qwen3-8B. These results collectively underscore the supe-rior capability of MM-Doc-R1 in handling complex long-document and visually-rich question answer-ing tasks. Our key contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose MM-Doc-R1 , a novel end-to-end framework for long document visual ques-tion answering that integrates a vision-aware workflow with multi-turn reinforcement learn-ing. Our framework empowers agents with iterative information discovery and synthesis, which significantly boosts retrieval accuracy and ultimately improves answering precision in complex document understanding. • We introduce Similarity-based Policy Opti-mization (SPO) , a new reinforcement learn-ing algorithm specifically developed to en-hance agents’ information-seeking capabili-ties within our framework. This approach pro-vides more stable and accurate baseline esti-mates for agents in multi-turn settings, thereby enabling faster learning convergence and im-proved overall performance. • We validate the effectiveness of MM-Doc-R1 through extensive experiments. Our ap-proach consistently improves the performance of Qwen3 models with 4B and 8B parame-ters across various subsets of MMLongBench-Doc, achieving overall superior results com-pared to existing baselines. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 DocVQA Task 

The Document Visual Question Answering (DocVQA) task needs models to answer questions by jointly reasoning over both textual and visual information present in documents (Mishra et al., 2019; Suri et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2023). Various approaches extract visual information from figures as a means to process different modalities (Memon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2024). Early research pri-marily concentrated on extracting concise answers from single, short documents (Mathew et al., 2021). However, with the advent of large language models, addressing QA tasks involving multiple or lengthy documents has become a significant challenge (Yu et al., 2024; Tanaka et al., 2025). Some bench-marks like MMLongbench-Doc (Ma et al., 2024) and LongDocURL (Deng et al., 2024) focus on the long document question answering. One approach to tackle this involves employing Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and text-based retrieval to iden-tify the most relevant document chunks (Khattab and Zaharia, 2020; Zhang et al., 2024). Another method utilizes visual encoders to obtain visual em-beddings, which are then used for retrieval based Stage 1: Planning       

> <think> step -by -step reasoning </think>
> Here is my proposed initial plan .
> (1) Use Search Tool with keywords [“disintegration time”, “gastric emptying”]
> (2) Read Page for the page(s) containing \"Subject 2 Fasted \" and \"Subject 2 Fed \"
> (3) …

Planner 

Query 

Answer Agent         

> <think> reasoning </think>
> ``` tool_code
> <search> [“keyword1”,“keyword2”]
> </search> ```
> <think> reasoning </think>
> ``` tool_code
> <read >[{“ page_ids ”: [44],
> “query”: “mean disintegration time
> fasted”}, …] </read> ```
> <think> reasoning </think>
> ```tool_code \n<FINISH> \n```
> <search_results >
> Search Results for sub query :disintegration time values
> Page ID :35, 44 BM 25 Retrieval Score :1.7 Snippet : content
> <\search_results >
> <read_results >
> Read Query: Read Sub Query:
> Read Page IDs: [44]
> Page Summarization:
> •Visual Elements Summary: The image contains…
> •Query -Relevant Information : The chart shows …
> </ read_results >

BM25 

text retrieval Doc OCR 

QWEN2.5 -VL 

Reading    

> <think> reasoning </think>
> My answer is …
> <document_toc >
> 1. Introduction
> 2. Related Work
> 3. System Design
> …
> </ document_toc >

Tool results 

## +

TOC   

> Step 1
> Step 2
> search_results

Stage 2: Executing  

> Step T

⋮

> read_results
> Tool Results

⋮Figure 2: Detailed framework of MM-Doc-R1. The framework operates in three sequential stages. First, the planner module formulates a reasoning plan based on the preprocessed document TOC and the user query. Subsequently, the information seeker executes a multi-turn retrieval and reading process, leveraging the “search" and “read" tools to gather relevant information. Finally, the collected knowledge is integrated by the answer agent , which generates a coherent and contextually accurate response. 

on a query’s embedding; a recent example of this is ColPALI (Faysse et al., 2024). The embedding retrieval method proves to be a highly valuable tool, finding application in multi-agent systems. Consequently, several agentic approaches, such as M3docrag (Cho et al., 2024) and MDocagent (Han et al., 2025), have leveraged multi-agent systems to solve the DocVQA problem. These systems in-tegrate text embedding-based RAG (Retrieval Aug-mented Generation) and image embedding-based RAG through different agents. By fostering coop-eration between Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs), these sys-tems aim to achieve superior results in the DocVQA task.These methods primarily address single-hop questions. However, multi-hop questions necessi-tate a multi-turn approach and the generation of concise sub-queries. Our proposed method focuses on resolving this particular challenge. 

2.2 Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) frame-works significantly enhance Large Language Mod-els (LLMs) by integrating external knowledge retrieval (Zhao et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023), thereby enabling the generation of more factually grounded responses (Han et al., 2023). While tradi-tional retrieval methods, such as BM25 and dense retrievers like BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024), ex-cel at lexical or semantic matching, they often en-counter limitations when tackling complex multi-hop queries (Gao et al., 2023). Recent advance-ments have led to multi-modal extensions, exem-plified by models like ColQwen2.5, which builds upon ColPALI (Faysse et al., 2024), that incor-porate visual features to enrich the retrieval pro-cess. However, these models still face challenges in terms of iterative refinement for complex ques-tion answering. Furthermore, some web search retrieval methods, such as Search-R1 (Jin et al., 2025) and Deepreasearcher (Zheng et al., 2025), employ multiple retrieval steps to address long-context QA problems. Yet, these methods primar-ily focus on the text modality and rely on generic web search tools. In contrast, our proposed method distinguishes itself by combining both visual and text modalities through the integration of a special-ized “visually-read" tool. This unique multimodal approach enables our method to address a broader range of problems within the visually-rich Question Answering (VQA) domain. 

2.3 Reinforcement Learning Algorithm 

The earliest and most widely adopted Reinforce-ment Learning method for training Large Language Models is Proximal Policy Optimization (Schul-man et al., 2017). PPO utilizes a critic model to estimate the baseline, which represents the av-erage reward of all possible actions in a given state. Recently, with the development of mod-els like DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO, Shao et al. (2024)) is gaining increasing traction for training LLMs. Compared to PPO, GRPO estimates the baseline using a group mean reward, thereby elim-inating the need for a separate critic model. This can lead to significant savings in computational resources and memory. Other methods, such as REINFORCE++ (Hu, 2025), also propose alter-native baseline estimations, like using the batch mean reward. More recently, VRPO (Zhu et al., 2025) revisits value modeling for robust RL train-ing under noisy supervision. This trend highlights ongoing research into more efficient and stable RL algorithms for LLM alignment. 

3 Method 

In this section, we present the core components of our proposed MM-Doc-R1 framework. First, we design an autonomous, structured agentic workflow to flexibly process multi-page documents. This workflow consists of three key agents: a planner, a seeker, and an answer agent. This design al-lows our agents to iteratively search for crucial information within documents. Secondly, we in-troduce an innovative reinforcement learning algo-rithm called Similarity-based Policy Optimization (SPO). We use SPO to train our agents from scratch, and this training method significantly enhances our agents’ information-seeking capabilities, empow-ering them to efficiently locate key information in documents. Our workflow is illustrated in Figure 2. 

3.1 Agentic Workflow 

To accurately and comprehensively respond to com-plex questions that necessitate integrating infor-mation from diverse sources or performing multi-step reasoning, our agent adheres to a meticulously structured workflow. This sequential yet itera-tive process not only mimics human cognitive ap-proaches to problem-solving but also endows the model with dynamic planning and essential self-correction capabilities. The entire workflow un-folds across five distinct, interconnected phases. 

3.1.1 Document Parsing 

When a document is received, we first use the OCR tool Doc2X 1 to parse it, extracting tables, figures, and text into Markdown format. After we get the OCR output, we create a table of contents (TOC) by the markdown text, providing a main abstract of the document. Subsequently, the document is chunked by pages. This process generates both a TOC and a list of chunks. Each chunk is derived from an OCR result and includes a corresponding image, which is a screenshot of the relevant page. 

3.1.2 Initial Planning 

Following document parsing, a planning agent is employed to formulate a global strategy. Its in-puts include the TOC and detected figures’ caption. The planner is responsible for breaking down the initial query into granular sub-queries and orches-trating the selection of necessary tools. This global perspective, integrated into the seeker’s history, critically informs and guides the agent’s decision-making process. 

3.1.3 Toolbox 

Our agent is equipped with two specialized tools to handle multi-modal documents. The “read" tool takes a page ID and a sub-query, using a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to extract and interpret relevant text, charts, and images from the specified page. This enhances our framework’s ability to process visual information, enabling more accurate understanding and reasoning of multimodal content within documents. The “search" tool uses BM25 with a sub-query to perform fast, keyword-based retrieval across the document, returning the Top-K most relevant text snippets. BM25 is chosen for its efficiency and effectiveness in rapid information lookup. 

3.1.4 Self-Refine & Information Seeking 

This phase forms the core iterative loop of MM-Doc-R1. The agent dynamically decomposes the complex question into executable sub-queries and, in each iteration, selects and invokes appropriate 

Tools (read or search) to retrieve needed informa-tion. It generates a sub-query, chooses a tool, exe-cutes it with parameters, and analyzes the output. If 

> 1https://github.com/NoEdgeAI/pdfdeal Q
> Trajectory 2
> Trajectory 1
> Trajectory N
> O1
> ON
> O2

… … Reward 

> model
> R1
> RN
> R2
> A1
> AN
> A2

… …

> Refence
> model
> Policy
> model

SPO/GRPO 

GRPO 

×

> R1
> RN

… = Bi

> 1
> 𝑁
> 1
> 𝑁
> B1
> BN
> B2

- =

> Ti
> T1
> T2
> TN

…

> S1
> S2
> SN

…

> W1
> W2
> WN

… 

> Normalize

×

> R1
> R2
> RN

… = Bi

SP OBaseline Figure 3: SPO and GRPO’s advantage estimation. The bottom panel shows the baseline computation of SPO and GRPO. 

the sub-query remains unresolved, the agent refines its plan and iterates. This process enables adaptive, step-by-step reasoning through complex document queries. 

3.1.5 Answer Generation 

After gathering sufficient information, the agent enters the answer generation phase. It synthesizes all retrieved context—including tool outputs and OCR text—enabling the LLM to reason over the ev-idence and produce a final, accurate, and coherent answer that fully addresses the original query. 

3.2 Training Method: Similarity-based Policy Optimization (SPO) 

To enable our agent to learn optimal strategies for tool invocation, sub-query decomposition, and overall workflow navigation, we propose a novel reinforcement learning algorithm called Similarity-based Policy Optimization (SPO). SPO serves as a significant enhancement to existing policy opti-mization techniques, particularly improving upon the GRPO algorithm by providing a more precise and stable learning signal for agentic decision-making. Figure 3 shows the difference between SPO and GRPO. 

3.2.1 Group Relative Policy Optimization 

GRPO is a popular algorithm proposed by DeepSeek; it is an improvement over PPO. The loss function of GRPO is 

JGRPO (θ) = Eq,o 1: G

 1

G

> G

X

> i=1

1

|oi|

> |oi|

X

> t=1

min 



rt(θ) ˆAi,t ,

clip( rt(θ), 1 − ε, 1 + ε) ˆAi,t 



− βDKL [πθ∥πref ]



(1) where rt(θ) = πθ (oi,t |q,o i,<t )  

> πθold (oi,t |q,o i,<t )

is the importance sampling ratio, ˆAi,t is the advantage estimate, ε

is the clipping threshold, and β controls the KL regularization strength. In multi-turn RL, GRPO calculates the advan-tage by comparing the reward of the current gen-erated policy ( Ti) with the average reward of all policies within the batch. The advantage function for GRPO is given by: 

AGRPO (Ti) = R(Ti) − 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

R(Tj ) (2) Here, R(Ti) represents the reward obtained for the current trajectory Ti, and N is the total number of trajectory in the current group. Note that in a multi-turn reinforcement learning training process, the entire response in the same trajectory receives the same reward. In traditional single-turn or fixed-environment RL settings, it’s typically assumed that all re-sponses within a group share the same initial con-ditions, often referred to as the “prompt". How-ever, this fundamental assumption becomes prob-lematic in multi-turn RL training. As training pro-gresses across multiple interaction rounds, the di-versity among individual trajectories rapidly in-creases. This divergence means that even within the same group, two trajectories can evolve under significantly different intermediate states or con-texts. Consequently, one cannot directly assume that the rewards derived from these disparate trajec-tories are directly comparable, as their underlying conditions are no longer uniform. 

3.2.2 Similarity-based Policy Optimization 

In multi-turn reinforcement learning, a trajectory is typically modeled as a sequence of states and actions: 

s0 → a0 → s1 → a1 → · · · → sT → aT , (3) where st denotes the state (eg. prompt and the en-vironment feedback) at step t, and at is the agent’s response. In GRPO, n trajectories are sampled in parallel from the same initial state s0, and a shared baseline V (s0) is used for advantage esti-mation. While computationally efficient, this ap-proach assumes that all trajectories remain seman-tically aligned throughout the interaction, which is an assumption that quickly breaks down as re-sponses diverge over turns. As dialogue progresses, even trajectories starting from the same prompt can evolve into significantly different contexts due to stochastic generation and feedback dynamics. Consequently, their value es-timates V (st) become increasingly heterogeneous. Using a single baseline derived from s0 introduces high bias in advantage estimation, especially for later turns, leading to unstable policy updates. To address this, we propose Similarity-based Policy Optimization (SPO), which replaces the uni-form baseline with a semantically weighted average over rewards in the batch. The key insight is that trajectories with similar semantic content are more likely to share underlying value structures and thus should serve as better baselines for one another. The advantage in SPO is defined as: 

ASPO (Ti) = R(Ti) −

> N

X

> j=1

wij R(Tj ), (4) where R(Ti) represents the total reward of trajec-tory Ti. The weight wij reflects the semantic simi-larity between trajectory Ti and Tj , and is normal-ized across the group: 

wij = similarity (emb (Ti), emb (Tj )) 

PNk=1 similarity (emb (Ti), emb (Tk)) , (5) Here, emb (T ) denotes the dense vector representa-tion of trajectory T , computed using the BGE-M3 model (Chen et al., 2024), which is frozen during training. The similarity function computes the co-sine similarity between embeddings. By constructing a dynamic, content-aware base-line, SPO reduces estimation variance and miti-gates bias caused by trajectory divergence. It ef-fectively prioritizes comparisons within semanti-cally coherent groups, yielding more accurate ad-vantages and stabler learning, particularly in long-horizon, multi-turn settings where traditional base-lines fail. 

3.2.3 Reward Function Design 

We employ a comprehensive set of metrics to eval-uate the performance of all models, reflecting both answer accuracy and the ability to correctly identify unanswerable questions. Our primary reward sig-nal for reinforcement learning is the Final Reward ,calculated by summing the read page Recall and a 

Correctness Score for the final answer. The Final Reward is defined as: Final Reward = Recall + Correctness Score The read page Recall measures how effectively the system directs the agent to relevant pages contain-ing the answer, defined as: Recall = |set(read pages) ∩ set(evidence pages) ||set(evidence pages) |

The Correctness Score for the final answer is deter-mined by following the answer judgment method-ology from MMlongbench-doc (Ma et al., 2024), specifically, we leverage Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct to extract a precise answer, and then perform a match-ing calculation against the ground-truth answer to derive this score. 

4 Experiments 

This section details the experimental setup, evalua-tion metrics, and comprehensive results demon-strating the efficacy of our proposed MM-Doc-R1 framework, particularly highlighting the per-formance gains achieved through our RL algorithm 

SPO .Evidence Modality Evidence Count Overall Method Text Layout Chart Table Figure Single Multi Unans. ACC F1                                                                                                                                             

> Human Performance
> Human ————————65.8 66.0
> Upper Bounds (Ground-Truth Evidence)
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B 33.8 38.7 31.8 32.3 34.1 46.6 20.5 92.8 46.8 41.7 Qwen3-8B 44.3 37.7 25.7 59.3 22.8 42.7 35.7 89.2 49.6 46.9
> RAG Baselines
> BM25 30.9 23.4 22.3 28.5 9.2 30.7 14.1 88.3 36.4 31.0 BGE-M3 32.0 20.8 21.7 40.3 14.7 35.4 18.5 84.3 39.3 34.8 Colqwen 27.8 25.0 16.5 22.4 23.7 33.9 13.7 82.5 36.5 31.2 Mdoc agent 33.1 29.3 25.8 32.6 30.0 43.7 18.4 43.4 35.0 33.3 M3doc RAG 39.2 26.7 29.8 39.0 32.0 50.3 21.2 40.7 38.4 36.7
> Ours: MM-Doc-R1
> Qwen3-4B 28.9 23.8 23.1 35.3 22.4 37.1 18.6 72.2 37.7 32.2 +GRPO 36.3 35.2 29.5 40.2 27.1 44.5 22.5 58.7 39.9 36.3 +SPO 41.1 37.2 35.6 47.2 30.5 50.5 27.5 68.0 46.0 41.2 Qwen3-8B 39.6 37.6 37.8 45.6 27.3 47.3 27.5 73.9 45.7 41.5 +GRPO 40.9 36.8 35.7 49.9 28.3 48.5 30.2 60.5 44.7 41.9 +SPO 46.2 38.1 40.8 52.8 35.9 56.0 31.2 68.2 49.7 46.1

Table 1: Performance comparison on the MMLongBench-Doc dataset (1,082 questions). The evaluation includes text-based RAG methods (BM25, BGE-M3), multi-modal RAG (ColQwen2.5-7B-multilingual), and agent-based systems (Mdoc Agent, M3doc RAG). Text-based methods use the top-4 retrieved pages and Qwen3-8B for answer generation. Multi-modal RAG uses the top-4 retrieved image pages and Qwen2.5-VL-7B. Agent-based methods operate over the top-5 retrieved pages, we use Qwen2.5-VL-7B as the VLM and Qwen3-8B as the LLM. Metrics include overall Accuracy (ACC) and F1, as well as performance on sub-categories by evidence modality (Text, Layout, Chart, Table, Figure), number of required evidences (Single, Multi), and unanswerable questions. Best scores among baselines and our methods are marked in bold, second-best in underline, considering only “RAG Baselines", and “Ours MM-Doc-R1" sections. 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

The MMLongbench-Doc dataset serves as our pri-mary benchmark for evaluating multi-modal long document question answering. This dataset fea-tures complex documents requiring multi-step rea-soning and spans various content types. For RL training, we use a subset of 300 samples from Long-DocURL as the validation set, and the remaining data as the training set. 

4.2 Results and Discussion 

Our experimental results, summarized in Table 1, clearly demonstrate the superior performance of MM-Doc-R1, particularly when trained with SPO, across various dimensions of the MMLongBench-Doc benchmark. As shown in the table, even in its untrained form, MM-Doc-R1 with Qwen3-8B achieves an overall Accuracy (ACC) that surpasses the current state-of-the-art baseline by 10.4%. In single-evidence questions—where the answer can be derived from a single retrieved page—our method outperforms the best existing approach by 5.7%. More notably, on multi-evidence questions that require information integration across multi-ple pages and often involve multi-hop reasoning, MM-Doc-R1 achieves a gain of 10.0%, highlight-ing its strong capability in handling complex, long-context reasoning tasks. Furthermore, our frame-work consistently achieves top performance across all evidence modalities, including Text, Layout, Chart, Table, and Figure, demonstrating its robust-ness and effectiveness in processing heterogeneous multi-modal document content. In terms of reinforcement learning, SPO exhibits clear advantages over GRPO. When applied to the Qwen3-4B model, SPO improves overall accuracy by 6.1% compared to GRPO; on Qwen3-8B, the im-provement reaches 5.0%. This consistent gain con-firms the effectiveness of our semantic similarity-based advantage estimation in mitigating the bias introduced by trajectory divergence in multi-turn dialogue settings. As illustrated in Figure 4, SPO not only achieves higher final performance but also demonstrates more stable and faster convergence during training. These results validate our hypothe-sis that leveraging semantically aligned trajectories as dynamic baselines leads to more accurate pol-icy updates, especially in long-horizon, multi-step Figure 4: Comparison of SPO and GRPO in Training; the base model in this figure is Qwen3-8B.                

> Model ACC F1 Unanswerable MM-Doc-R1 (Qwen3-8B) 45.7 41.5 73.9 w/o TOC 44.3 39.9 73.5 w/o Read pages’ OCR 43.4 38.7 74.7 w/o VLM Read 42.1 37.3 81.6
> Table 2: Ablation study of MM-Doc-R1 components on MMLongBench-Doc, using Qwen3-8B. All metrics are in %.

reasoning scenarios. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

In order to assess the individual contributions of each component within MM-Doc-R1, we con-ducted an ablation study, summarized in Table 2. The removal of any component consistently led to a degradation in performance, underscoring the vi-tal role of the table of contents (TOC), page OCR reading, and VLM reading modules in enhancing the model’s overall efficacy. These findings collec-tively emphasize the synergistic effectiveness of all components within MM-Doc-R1. 

4.4 Recall Analysis 

Table 3 presents the Recall performance of various models. Our MM-Doc-R1 framework achieves a recall of 66.3% when just read 3.35 pages, signifi-cantly outperforming traditional BM25 (42.0%), embedding-based BGE-M3 (51.3%), and multi-modal Colqwen-2.5-VL-7B (65.4%). Notably, MM-Doc-R1 achieves this highest recall while re-quiring an average of just 3.35 pages read, under-scoring the effectiveness of its integrated agentic framework. This superior recall ensures the agent accesses more relevant evidence, crucial for accu-rate question answering in multi-modal contexts. Model average pages Recall BM25 5 42.0 BGE-M3 5 51.3 Colqwen-2.5-VL-7B 5 65.4 MM-Doc-R1(SPO) 3.35 66.3 

> Table 3: Recall Performance

5 Conclusion 

We presented MM-Doc-R1 , addressing the limita-tions of single-pass RAG in long-document visual QA through an iterative, agentic workflow. Cen-tral to our framework is Similarity-based Policy Optimization (SPO) , which mitigates baseline es-timation bias in multi-turn RL by leveraging se-mantic trajectory similarity for precise reward av-eraging. Our experiments on MMLongbench-Doc demonstrate that MM-Doc-R1 outperforms prior baselines by 10.4%, with SPO significantly surpass-ing standard GRPO across multiple model scales. These results validate that integrating vision-aware reasoning with trajectory-informed RL effectively advances the state-of-the-art for complex, multi-modal information discovery. 

6 Limitations 

While MM-Doc-R1 and the SPO algorithm demon-strate substantial improvements in long-document visual reasoning, several inherent limitations should be noted. First, the effectiveness of our framework is par-tially dependent on the quality of initial docu-ment parsing . Although MM-Doc-R1 employs a robust seeker to navigate content, its planning and retrieval efficiency still rely on the fidelity of the structural metadata (such as the Table of Contents) and the OCR accuracy of the ingestion engine. In scenarios where documents are severely degraded or lack standard hierarchical formatting, the perfor-mance may be constrained by the noise introduced during the pre-processing stage. Second, our current study primarily focuses on 

understanding static documents . The proposed multi-turn workflow and reinforcement learning strategy are optimized for fixed document formats like PDFs and high-resolution images. However, real-world digital documents can be dynamic or semi-structured (e.g., interactive reports or web-based content). The adaptation of the agentic seeker to environments where document content or layouts might dynamically evolve during interac-tion remains an area for future exploration. Finally, while SPO effectively reduces baseline estimation bias, its current validation is centered on English-centric benchmarks. The cross-lingual robustness and generalizability of the seeker across diverse linguistic structures have yet to be exten-sively investigated. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish to thank the anonymous review-ers for their helpful comments. This work was partially funded by National Key R&D Program of China No.2025ZD0215702, National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62576106, 62476061, 62376061). 

References 

Srikar Appalaraju, Bhavan Jasani, Bhargava Urala Kota, Yusheng Xie, and R Manmatha. 2021. Docformer: End-to-end transformer for document understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-ference on computer vision , pages 993–1003. Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. Bge m3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216 .Jaemin Cho, Debanjan Mahata, Ozan Irsoy, Yujie He, and Mohit Bansal. 2024. M3docrag: Multi-modal retrieval is what you need for multi-page multi-document understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04952 .Chao Deng, Jiale Yuan, Pi Bu, Peijie Wang, Zhong-Zhi Li, Jian Xu, Xiao-Hui Li, Yuan Gao, Jun Song, Bo Zheng, and 1 others. 2024. Longdocurl: a com-prehensive multimodal long document benchmark integrating understanding, reasoning, and locating. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18424 .Manuel Faysse, Hugues Sibille, Tony Wu, Bilel Omrani, Gautier Viaud, Céline Hudelot, and Pierre Colombo. 2024. Colpali: Efficient document retrieval with vision language models. In The Thirteenth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yixin Dai, Jiawei Sun, Haofen Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2(1). Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shi-rong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Siwei Han, Peng Xia, Ruiyi Zhang, Tong Sun, Yun Li, Hongtu Zhu, and Huaxiu Yao. 2025. Mdocagent: A multi-modal multi-agent framework for document understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13964 .Yikun Han, Chunjiang Liu, and Pengfei Wang. 2023. A comprehensive survey on vector database: Storage and retrieval technique, challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11703 .Jian Hu. 2025. Reinforce++: A simple and efficient approach for aligning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03262 .Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7969–7992. Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 .Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Colbert: Effi-cient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval , pages 39– 48. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Yubo Ma, Yuhang Zang, Liangyu Chen, Meiqi Chen, Yizhu Jiao, Xinze Li, Xinyuan Lu, Ziyu Liu, Yan Ma, Xiaoyi Dong, and 1 others. 2024. Mmlongbench-doc: Benchmarking long-context document un-derstanding with visualizations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01523 .Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and CV Jawa-har. 2021. Docvqa: A dataset for vqa on document images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter con-ference on applications of computer vision , pages 2200–2209. Jamshed Memon, Maira Sami, Rizwan Ahmed Khan, and Mueen Uddin. 2020. Handwritten optical charac-ter recognition (ocr): A comprehensive systematic lit-erature review (slr). IEEE access , 8:142642–142668. Anand Mishra, Shashank Shekhar, Ajeet Kumar Singh, and Anirban Chakraborty. 2019. Ocr-vqa: Visual question answering by reading text in images. In 

2019 international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR) , pages 947–952. IEEE. Boci Peng, Yun Zhu, Yongchao Liu, Xiaohe Bo, Haizhou Shi, Chuntao Hong, Yan Zhang, and Siliang Tang. 2024. Graph retrieval-augmented generation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921 .John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseek-math: Pushing the limits of mathematical reason-ing in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Lei Fang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025a. R1-searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in llms via reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05592 .Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Wenqing Tian, Zhipeng Chen, and Yuhuan Wu. 2025b. Yingqian min, wayne xin zhao, lei fang, and ji-rong wen. r1-searcher++: Incentivizing the dynamic knowledge acquisition of llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17005 .Manan Suri, Puneet Mathur, Franck Dernoncourt, Kanika Goswami, Ryan A Rossi, and Dinesh Manocha. 2024. Visdom: Multi-document qa with visually rich elements using multimodal retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10704 .Ryota Tanaka, Taichi Iki, Taku Hasegawa, Kyosuke Nishida, Kuniko Saito, and Jun Suzuki. 2025. Vdocrag: Retrieval-augmented generation over visually-rich documents. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 24827–24837. Jordy Van Landeghem, Rubèn Tito, Łukasz Borchmann, Michał Pietruszka, Pawel Joziak, Rafal Powalski, Dawid Jurkiewicz, Mickaël Coustaty, Bertrand Anck-aert, Ernest Valveny, and 1 others. 2023. Document understanding dataset and evaluation (dude). In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 19528–19540. Yiran Wu, Tianwei Yue, Shaokun Zhang, Chi Wang, and Qingyun Wu. 2024. Stateflow: Enhancing llm task-solving through state-driven workflows. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Shi Yu, Chaoyue Tang, Bokai Xu, Junbo Cui, Jun-hao Ran, Yukun Yan, Zhenghao Liu, Shuo Wang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Vis-rag: Vision-based retrieval-augmented generation on multi-modality documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10594 .Junyuan Zhang, Qintong Zhang, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, Zichen Wen, Ying Li, Ka-Ho Chow, Con-ghui He, and Wentao Zhang. 2024. Ocr hin-ders rag: Evaluating the cascading impact of ocr on retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02592 .Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhen-gren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. 2024. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated con-tent: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19473 .Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025. Deepresearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforce-ment learning in real-world environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03160 .Dingwei Zhu, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Senjie Jin, Guo-qiang Zhang, Jiazheng Zhang, Junjie Ye, Mingxu Chai, Enyu Zhou, Ming Zhang, Caishuang Huang, Yunke Zhang, Yuran Wang, and Tao Gui. 2025. Vrpo: Rethinking value modeling for robust rl training un-der noisy supervision. Preprint , arXiv:2508.03058. A Appendix 

A.1 Evaluation Metrics 

We adopt the exact same evaluation protocol as MMLongBench-Doc (Ma et al., 2024). We re-port the overall F1 score (F1) and the overall ac-curacy (ACC). To assess modality-specific perfor-mance, we break down accuracy by content type —-Text, Layout, Chart, Table, and Figure —-reflecting the diverse modalities present in long documents. Questions are further categorized by the number of evidences required: Single Evidence and Multi Evidence , to evaluate reasoning capabilities in sim-ple versus complex scenarios. Additionally, we measure Unanswerable Accuracy , i.e., the per-centage of questions correctly identified as unan-swerable, which is crucial for assessing the robust-ness of QA systems in real-world settings. 

A.2 Baselines 

To rigorously evaluate MM-Doc-R1 , we compare it against a comprehensive set of state-of-the-art RAG and agent-based baselines across different paradigms. All text-based methods use Qwen3-8B to generate answer, and multi-modal methods use Qwen2.5-VL-7B. For text-based RAG methods, we include BM25 and BGE-M3. BM25 is a classical sparse retrieval approach using keyword matching. BGE-M3 is a dense retrieval method that leverages semantic embeddings for document retrieval. Since the orig-inal PDFs are image-based, we apply Doc2X for high-fidelity OCR to extract textual content before indexing. The top-4 retrieved pages are used as evidence for answer generation. For multi-modal RAG, we evaluate ColQwen2.5-7b-multilingual, which retrieves relevant document pages using vision-language understanding and per-forms end-to-end answer generation from images. This method uses the top-4 retrieved pages as in-put to maximize coverage of visual and structural content. We also compare against recent agent-based doc-ument QA systems: Mdoc Agent (Han et al., 2025) and M3doc RAG (Cho et al., 2024). Both systems operate over the top-5 retrieved pages to ensure consistent input scope. All methods use the same candidate evidence pool and are evaluated under consistent metrics to ensure fair comparison. 

A.3 Implementation Details 

Our framework is implemented using the Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-4B Large Language Models as the core agent orchestrator. The read tool incorpo-rates Qwen2.5-7B-VL, a Vision-Language Model (VLM) designed for multi-modal content extrac-tion, which is employed in a zero-shot manner (i.e., without additional training). The search tool uti-lizes the BM25 algorithm for text retrieval, return-ing the top 10 most relevant pages for each query. The final input to the answer model consists of a short snippet from the search result and the detailed context from the read result, where the search con-tent occupies only a minimal portion of the overall context and is not fed in full. For reinforcement learning training, we specifically evaluate two pol-icy optimization algorithms: GRPO and our pro-posed SPO. Both GRPO and SPO are trained under the same settings, except for the advantage estima-tion method. We employ the verl framework as our reinforce-ment learning (RL) backbone. Within this frame-work, we apply a custom patch to the advantage computation function to accommodate our pro-posed algorithmic enhancements. For training infrastructure, we utilize a dis-tributed setup powered by 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs .The system leverages a hybrid of data and model parallelism to support the efficient training of large-scale policy models (e.g., Transformer-based ar-chitectures). All computations are accelerated via CUDA, and Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) is employed to significantly enhance training through-put while maintaining numerical stability. Our implementation is built upon the GRPO 

algorithm, with key modifications to the advantage computation and update dynamics. The primary hyperparameters are configured as follows: - Rollout length : Set to 4, meaning 4 steps of environment interaction are collected per policy sampling cycle before performing value estimation and policy update. This balances training stability with timely feedback. - Batch size : Set to 4, indicating the number of complete rollout trajectories used in each policy up-date. Given that each rollout contains multiple time steps, the effective number of state-action pairs per update is 4 × 4 = 16 .- Temperature : Set to 0.8 , which controls the level of exploration in the policy distribu-tion. A lower temperature encourages more deter-ministic outputs, promoting convergence on high-confidence actions while preserving moderate ex-ploration. - Learning rate : The policy network is trained with a learning rate of 5e-7 (5 × 10 −7), using the Adam optimizer. This conservative learning rate is chosen to accommodate the high-dimensional parameter space and high-precision gradient com-putation enabled by the H100 GPUs, helping to prevent policy collapse. - KL coefficient : Set to 0.005 , serving as a reg-ularization term to constrain the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the old and new poli-cies during updates. This prevents excessive policy shifts and enhances training robustness. 

A.4 Computational Overhead Analysis 

Since the iterative agentic workflow naturally in-curs more LLM/VLM calls than single-pass RAG, we quantify the actual per-query latency to assess practical usability. Table 4 reports the wall-clock time per question on the full MMLongBench-Doc set (1,082 questions).                

> Method Avg Min Max ColQwen2.5 RAG (one-pass) ∼40 ––MM-Doc-R1 (Qwen3-4B, no train) 84.47 10 724 MM-Doc-R1 (Qwen3-8B, no train) 109.32 11 397 MM-Doc-R1 (Qwen3-8B, SPO) 154.44 23 316

Table 4: Per-question latency (seconds) on MMLongBench-Doc. 

Test-time scaling, not free overhead. MM-Doc-R1 belongs to the family of test-time scaling ap-proaches (cf. DeepSeek-R1, Gemini Deep Re-search): additional compute is exchanged for sub-stantially higher accuracy on multi-hop, multi-evidence questions. The 109.32 s average for the 8B variant is well within practical document-analysis usage, while delivering the +10.4% abso-lute ACC gain reported in §4. 

Lightweight retrieval scales better with docu-ment length. Embedding-based RAG must vec-torize all pages of every new document, so its la-tency grows roughly linearly with document length and incurs additional storage cost. MM-Doc-R1 instead uses BM25 for first-stage retrieval, which requires no precomputed embeddings and supports real-time DocQA on freshly arrived documents. Consequently, as documents grow longer, the rel-ative overhead of MM-Doc-R1 over RAG shrinks 

rather than grows, making the agentic workflow particularly suited to long-document scenarios. 

Why the SPO-trained model is slower. The SPO-trained agent (154.44 s) takes longer than the untrained one (109.32 s) because RL training encourages more proactive multi-turn exploration, which directly contributes to the recall and accuracy gains; the cost–benefit trade-off remains favorable. 

A.5 BM25 Topk choose 

Figure 5: Performance with BM25 topk 

Figure 5 presents the impact of varying the top-k parameter on the performance of MM-Doc-R1.Performance across all metrics generally im-proves with increasing values of parameter k. How-ever, substantial gains are primarily observed when 

k < 10 . For k > 10 , the rate of improve-ment slows, and performance may even decline, attributable to the increased context length poten-tially diluting relevant information. Consequently, 

k = 10 was selected as our experimental setting. 

A.6 Prompt 

Listing 1: Prompt for Planner 

> You are an expert in **long document analysis** and **information retrieval planning**, capable of designing systematic and efficient exploration strategies using multiple types of clues. Your task: Based on the user 's query, the document 's table of contents (TOC) and the document 's list of figures, create an **initial research plan ** that is goal-oriented and progresses step by step, helping downstream modules efficiently understand and extract information from the document. You may use the following tools in your planning: (1) Search Tool: Input keywords to search for relevant content in the document. It returns page IDs that contain those keywords. You can search multiple keywords at once.

(2) Read Page: Read up to 5 pages of the document and prepare the content for analysis. Notes: - Your plan should not exceed 10 steps. Keep the logic clear and progressive. Please output the initial plan in the following format: <output_format> Here is my proposed initial plan. (1) ... (2) ... (3) ... (4) ... (5) ... (6) ... ... </output_format> {example} <input> - Query: {query} - document 'd table of contents: <document_toc> {document_toc} </document_toc> <list_of_figures> {list_of_figures} </list_of_figures> </input> 

Listing 2: Prompt for Seeker 

You are performing a step-by-step task of information extraction and understanding. Based on the current query goal and the steps already taken (plan_done), you need to :(1) First, explain your reasoning process, including: - What information is still missing or unclear? - What is the next key issue or sub-goal to address? - Which tools can help fill in this gap? Do you need a combination of text and visual content? (2) Then, based on the above analysis, decide on the next tool invocation(s). You can use the following tools. In each step, you may choose a reasonable number of queries: ---**(1) Search Tool**: Search whether certain keywords or topics appear in the document. Returns brief summaries of the pages where matches are found. Format: 

``` tool_code <search>["keyword1", "keyword2"]</search> 

```` 

**(2) Read Page**: Read the content of specified pages. Returns a summary relevant to your query. You may read up to 3 pages at a time. Clearly state your intent for using this tool. Format: 

``` tool_code <read> [{{ "page_ids": [4, 5, 8], "query": "sub_query1" }}, {{ "page_ids": [13, 19, 20], "query": "sub_query2" }}] </read> 

``` 

**(3) Termination Marker**: When you determine that enough information has been gathered and the task can end, return: 

``` tool_code <FINISH> 

``` 

Special Notes: * Each step must be concise, strategic, and limited to one tool only. * You are encouraged to demonstrate **structured, progressive strategic thinking**. {example} Query: {query} Steps already taken: {plan_done} Your reasoning and next-step plan: 

Listing 3: Prompt for reader 

You are a professional page summary expert. Your task is to extract key information about the origin query and sub query from given pages. Your input consists of: 1. An origin query 2. A sub query #### Instructions 1. First, extract all visual elements: - Tables - Figures - Charts - Images - Text content 2. Then, identify information relevant to: - Origin Query - Sub Query 3. Format your output as: - Visual Elements Summary - Query-Relevant Information (text and visual elements) - Key Findings #### Important Notes - Base your analysis strictly on the provided images - Do not make assumptions or add information beyond what is shown - If required information is missing, clearly state: "Cannot answer due to insufficient data" - The sub query is the most recent and relevant query, while the origin query is the earlier context query Input: Origin Query: {origin_query} Sub Query: {sub_query} Image of Pages: 

Listing 4: Prompt for answer 

Please answer the question using only the available information. Do not fabricate or assume any details beyond what has been provided. If the necessary information is not available, clearly state that you cannot answer the question due to lack of relevant data. question:{origin_query} Related Information:{past_information} 

A.7 Use of AI 

We utilized generative AI tools to assist in refin-ing the manuscript’s language and optimizing the structure of our source code. We used these tools to improve clarity and coding efficiency; however, we reviewed and edited all outputs to ensure technical accuracy. We take full responsibility for the final content of the manuscript and the integrity of the implemented code.