Title: Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01954v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:18:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

Polydoros Giannouris The University of Manchester Manchester, UK polydoros.giannouris@manchester.ac.uk Yuechen Jiang The University of Manchester Manchester, UK yuechen.jiang@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk Lingfei Qian The Fin AI USA lfqian94@gmail.com Yuyan Wang The University of Manchester Manchester, UK yuyan.wang-2@manchester.ac.uk Xueqing Peng The Fin AI USA xueqing.peng2024@gmail.com Jimin Huang The University of Manchester Manchester, UK The Fin AI USA jimin.huang@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk Guojun Xiong Harvard University Cambridge, MA, USA xionggj1@gmail.com Sophia Ananiadou The University of Manchester Manchester, UK Archimedes/Athena RC Athens, Greece sophia.ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk 

## Abstract 

Many sequential decision-making problems exhibit hierarchical structure, where high-level semantic choices constrain downstream actions and feedback is delayed and ambiguous. Learning in such settings is challenging due to credit assignment: performance degra-dation may arise from flawed abstractions, suboptimal execution, or their interaction. We study this challenge through pair trading, a domain that naturally combines long-horizon semantic reasoning for asset pair selection with short-horizon execution under partial observability. We formulate pair trading as a hierarchical reinforce-ment learning problem and propose a language-driven optimization framework in which both high-level and low-level policies are pa-rameterized by large language models (LLMs) and optimized exclu-sively through prompt updates. Our approach leverages pretrained LLMs as hierarchical policies and uses trajectory- and episode-level textual feedback to adapt abstractions and execution without gradient-based fine-tuning. By explicitly separating abstraction se-lection from execution, the framework reduces non-stationarity across hierarchical levels and enables targeted adaptation under delayed feedback. Experiments on real-world market data show consistent improvements over traditional and LLM-based baselines, demonstrating the effectiveness of language-driven hierarchical reinforcement learning. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Natural language processing ;

Planning under uncertainty .

## Keywords 

Pair Trading, Large Language Models, Prompt-based Optimization, Financial Decision Making 

## 1 Introduction 

Many real-world sequential decision-making problems exhibit an inherent hierarchical structure: high-level semantic choices con-strain downstream actions, while feedback is observed only after these choices interact with low-level execution in a stochastic envi-ronment [ 37 ]. In such settings, the root cause of performance degra-dation is inherently ambiguous. Failures may come from flawed abstractions, suboptimal execution, or the interplay between the two, yet the environment provides no direct signal to isolate the source of error. This ambiguity poses a fundamental challenge for learning, particularly when abstractions evolve over time, and feed-back is delayed and aggregated [35]. Many agent-based decision systems optimize behavior end-to-end using a single reward-driven policy [ 3 , 8, 39 ] . While effective when behavior and outcomes are tightly coupled, such approaches entangle abstraction and execution: updates affect all components simultaneously, making the source of failure unclear. This limita-tion is especially severe in hierarchical settings, where errors are revealed only through delayed feedback. Hierarchical reinforce-ment learning (HRL) explicitly separates abstraction selection from execution, but typically manages credit assignment through strong assumptions such as fixed temporal abstractions or averaging out execution noise [ 19 , 28 , 33 , 44 ]. These choices stabilize learning but limit an agent’s ability to revise abstractions when semantic relationships drift. Pair trading provides a concise stress test for this challenge. Pair selection requires long-horizon semantic reasoning over evolving economic relationships, while profitability depends on short-horizon execution under market noise [ 22 ]. Losses may therefore reflect invalid abstractions, suboptimal execution, or tran-sient noise without clear attribution [ 5], making pair trading a challenging benchmark for hierarchical learning. In this work, we formulate pair trading as a hierarchical sequen-tial decision-making problem [ 9, 34 , 44 ] and study how abstraction, selection, and execution can be adapted under delayed and am-biguous feedback. Rather than enforcing bilevel optimality through 

> arXiv:2605.01954v1 [cs.AI] 3 May 2026 Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou

explicit algorithmic constraints, we adopt a representational ap-proach: we design the policy class so that hierarchical assumptions are approximately respected by construction. Our key idea is to use language as a shared semantic interface across hierarchical levels. Unlike scalar rewards that obscure the source of error, lan-guage enables explicit semantic attribution: textual feedback can distinguish whether a failure stems from a flawed high-level thesis (abstraction) or poor low-level timing (execution). We parameter-ize both the high-level pair selector and the low-level trader as prompt-conditioned large language models (LLMs), and adapt their behavior solely through prompt updates driven by environment feedback. This induces a natural separation of time scales, distin-guishing episodic abstraction updates from intra-episode execution adaptation. This structure aligns credit assignment with the avail-ability of feedback, without requiring gradient-based fine-tuning or expert-labeled data. Building on this design, we propose a language-driven hierarchi-cal optimization framework in which prompt adaptation serves as the sole mechanism for policy improvement. At the low level, the trader performs intra-episode textual policy optimization, using trajectory-level feedback to revise execution rules while condition-ing on a fixed selected pair. At the high level, the selector per-forms episodic textual optimization, receiving delayed, aggregated feedback that reflects the downstream performance of its abstrac-tion choices. By explicitly separating abstraction selection from execution and aligning their adaptation schedules with feedback availability, the framework reduces non-stationarity across hier-archical levels and enables targeted adaptation under ambiguous credit assignment. We evaluate our approach on real-world U.S. equity market data. Empirical results demonstrate consistent improvements over sta-tistical baselines, reinforcement learning methods, and LLM-based alternatives. Ablation studies further show that both hierarchical decomposition and prompt adaptation are necessary: without either component, performance degrades substantially. Together, these results suggest that language-driven hierarchical policy optimiza-tion provides a principled and effective approach to sequential decision-making problems characterized by evolving abstractions and delayed feedback. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Pair Trading 

Traditional pair trading relies on statistical heuristics, such as dis-tance minimization [ 15 ] or cointegration tests [ 12 , 23 , 45 ], to iden-tify mean-reverting spreads. However, these parametric methods increasingly suffer from diminishing profitability due to market efficiency and transaction costs [ 4, 11 , 26 , 38 ]. To address high-dimensional search spaces and non-linear dependencies, recent studies have incorporated machine learning for efficient cluster-ing [ 40 ] and advanced feature engineering [ 18 , 27 , 43 ]. Concur-rently, the execution paradigm has shifted from static thresholds to dynamic Reinforcement Learning policies [ 6, 13 , 17 , 46 ], further enhanced by risk-aware mechanisms like dynamic stop-loss bound-aries and position scaling [ 2, 24 , 25 , 52 ]. Despite these advances, most approaches struggle with structural breaks [ 31 ] and treat pair selection and trading as isolated tasks. While emerging unified frameworks [ 19 , 51 ] attempt joint optimization [ 42 ], they rely ex-clusively on numerical data, neglecting the semantic information essential for understanding fundamental asset correlations. 

## 2.2 LLMs for Trading 

Early applications primarily utilized LLMs for return prediction through sentiment analysis of financial news or specialized instruc-tion tuning [ 29 , 30 , 54 ]. Beyond text analysis, generative approaches have emerged to autonomously mine trading strategies by model-ing price histories or synthesizing executable code [ 32 , 47 , 48 ]. To handle sequential decision-making in volatile markets, recent re-search has shifted toward autonomous agents capable of end-to-end execution. Several frameworks enhance decision comprehensive-ness by integrating multimodal data, external tools, or system-level simulations [ 14 , 53 , 57 ]. More advanced architectures integrate gradient-based reinforcement learning for policy optimization [ 50 ]or employ multi-agent debate mechanisms [49]. Notably, FinMem [55 ] addresses long-term dependency via a layered memory mech-anism, while FinCon [ 56 ] improves robustness by simulating an investment firm’s hierarchy through conceptual verbal reinforce-ment. 

## 2.3 LLMs as Hierarchical Policies 

Recent work demonstrates that LLMs can be incorporated into trading systems as decision-making components, with several stud-ies reporting promising trading performance [ 10 , 56 ]. This can be attributed to their ability to process heterogeneous information sources, encode prior domain knowledge, and operate over abstract representations that align naturally with decision making. Previous work has utilized LLMs in the context of HRL either as frozen, well-performing planners that provide high-level guidance to learned controllers [ 7 , 16 ], or as trainable policies fine-tuned exogenously or through online interaction to serve as hierarchical decision-makers directly[ 21 ]. These approaches are subject to two key limitations: first, frozen LLMs are highly sensitive to prompt design, such that hand-crafted prompts may fail to elicit optimal behavior [ 1]; sec-ond, exogenous fine-tuning typically relies on expert-curated data, which is costly to obtain and may limit robustness or generalization across regimes [20]. 

## 3 Problem formulation 

We formulate pair trading as a hierarchical sequential decision-making problem in which an agent must jointly reason over slow-moving semantic abstractions and fast execution decisions under delayed and aggregated feedback. The key challenge is ambiguous credit assignment: performance degradation may arise from invalid abstractions, suboptimal execution, or their interaction, and the environment provides no direct signal indicating which level should adapt. 

## 3.1 Pair Trading as a Hierarchical Decision Problem 

We consider a universe of tradable assets X = {𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑁 }. At each time 𝑡 , the agent observes an information state 𝑜 𝑡 that summarizes historical prices and auxiliary signals such as news or market in-dicators at current time step 𝑡 . The environment is modeled as a Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), where the latent market state 𝑠 𝑡 is unobserved and rewards are revealed only through trading outcomes. Pair trading exhibits a natural temporal and semantic hierarchy. At a coarse time scale, the agent selects an unordered asset pair 

𝑧 = {𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑥 𝑗 } that defines a trading context. This choice reflects a high-level abstraction capturing assumed economic or statistical relationships between assets. At a finer time scale (e.g., daily), con-ditioned on the selected pair, the agent executes market-neutral trading actions such as entering or exiting long–short positions based on short-horizon price dynamics. Formally, we decompose the agent’s behavior into two levels: (i) a high-level selector policy 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(𝑧 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 ) that chooses a trading context 𝑧 given high-level observations 𝑜 𝑡 , and (ii) a low-level trader policy 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

(𝑎 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ) that selects execution actions conditioned on both the current observation 𝑜 𝑡 and the fixed context 𝑧 𝑡 .The joint policy factorizes as 

𝜋 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 ) = 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(𝑧 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 ), 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

(𝑎 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ), (1) where the selector operates at the episode level and the trader interacts with the environment at each step within the episode. Hence, the objective of pair trading becomes 

max 

> 𝜋 𝜙,𝜃

𝐽 (𝜙, 𝜃 ) =

∭

𝑑 𝜋 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑜 ) 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(𝑧 |𝑜 ) 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

(𝑎 |𝑜, 𝑧 )

𝑄 𝜋 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 )𝑑𝑎 𝑑𝑧 𝑑𝑜, 

(2) where 𝑄 𝜋 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ) denotes the expected discounted return ob-tained by executing action 𝑎 under context 𝑧 at information state 

𝑜 , followed by continued execution of the same hierarchical pol-icy, and 𝑑 𝜋 (𝑜 ) denote the discounted visitation distribution over information states induced by 𝜋 . Specifically, we have 

𝑄 𝜋 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑜, 𝑧, 𝑎 ) = E

" ∞∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝛾 𝑡 𝑟 (𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 )| 𝑜 0 = 𝑜, 𝑧 0 = 𝑧, 𝑎 0 = 𝑎, 𝑧 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(· | 𝑜 𝑡 ), 𝑎 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

(· | 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 )

#

. (3) 

## 3.2 Objectives at Different Levels 

Under this formulation, the low-level trader solves a context-conditioned control problem: given a fixed pair 𝑧 , it must adapt to local mar-ket dynamics and noise to maximize cumulative return within the episode. This problem is characterized by partial observability and high-frequency stochasticity. The high-level selector , in contrast, faces a contextual bandit problem over a combinatorial action space of asset pairs. Each selection commits the agent to a trading context over an extended horizon and yields a delayed, aggregated reward equal to the cumulative return achieved by the trader. Crucially, the selector receives no counterfactual feedback about how alternative pairs would have performed under the same execution policy. This separation highlights the core difficulty of pair trading: poor performance may reflect an invalid abstraction (pair selection), ineffective execution, or transient noise masking a valid strategy. A flat policy entangles these factors, while a hierarchical formulation preserves their semantic and temporal structure. 

## 3.3 Bilevel Interpretation 

The hierarchical objective admits an approximate bilevel interpreta-tion. Let 𝑅 (𝜏 ) denote the cumulative return of a trading trajectory 

𝜏 generated by the trader under a fixed context 𝑧 . The overall ob-jective can be informally expressed as 

max  

> 𝜙

E𝑧 ∼𝜋 sel   

> 𝜙 (· | 𝑜 )



max  

> 𝜃

E𝜏 ∼𝜋 tr   

> 𝜃 (· | 𝑧 )

𝑅 (𝜏 ) 

. (4) This view is not assumed to hold exactly. In practice, the in-ner optimization is imperfect, and concurrent learning induces non-stationarity across levels [ 41 ]. Rather than enforcing bilevel optimality through algorithmic constraints, we adopt this inter-pretation as a conceptual guide: it clarifies the roles of abstraction selection and execution, and motivates mechanisms that allow each level to adapt based on feedback at the appropriate temporal scale. In the following sections, we design a policy parameterization and optimization procedure that biases learning toward regimes where this bilevel structure is approximately respected, enabling targeted adaptation under delayed and ambiguous feedback. 

## 4 Language-Grounded Hierarchical Policy Design 

Section 3 reveals that pair trading admits an approximate bilevel structure, but that directly optimizing this structure is challenging due to non-stationarity and ambiguous credit assignment across decision levels. Rather than enforcing bilevel optimality through additional algorithmic constraints, we adopt a representational approach: we design the policy class so that bilevel assumptions are approximately respected by construction. Our key idea is to use language as a shared semantic interface across hierarchical levels. We parameterize both the high-level selector and the low-level trader as prompt-conditioned LLMs, and adapt their behavior solely through prompt updates driven by environment feedback. This induces a natural separation of time scales—episodic abstraction updates and intra-episode execu-tion adaptation—aligning credit assignment with the structure of feedback. 

## 4.1 Hierarchical Formalism 

We do not restate the hierarchical problem formulation introduced in Section 3. Instead, this section specifies how the abstract hierar-chical components in Section 3 are instantiated under a language-grounded policy representation, making the bilevel interpretation operational in practice. 

Language-grounded observation interfaces. At the episode level, the Selector observes a high-level information state 𝑜 ℎ𝑒 that summa-rizes the asset universe 𝑋 over a long temporal horizon. This state is constructed from two components: (i) aggregated price-based statis-tics derived from {𝑝 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1, and (ii) semantic summaries derived from unstructured signals {𝑢 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1 such as news and sentiment. Rather than being consumed by a parametric function approximator, 𝑜 ℎ𝑒 

is serialized into a structured textual prompt, which defines the Selector’s decision context. At the intra-episode level, the Trader observes a low-level infor-mation state 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑡 consisting of recent spread dynamics, local price Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou 

features, and pair-specific semantic descriptors. This information is similarly encoded into textual form and provided to the Trader as part of its prompt context, ensuring that both abstraction and execution operate over a shared semantic interface. 

Episodic abstraction selection. Given the high-level prompt con-structed from 𝑜 ℎ𝑒 , the Selector samples an asset pair 

𝑧 𝑒 ∼ 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(· | 𝑜 ℎ𝑒 ), (5) where 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

denotes the stochastic distribution induced by the prompt-conditioned language model. The selected pair 𝑧 𝑒 is fixed for the du-ration of episode 𝑒 and is injected verbatim into the Trader’s prompt as a conditioning context. No updates to the Selector prompt occur within the episode, enforcing the episodic time scale assumed in the hierarchical formulation. The Selector receives feedback only after the episode concludes, in the form of the cumulative trading return realized by the Trader under 𝑧 𝑒 . This delayed, aggregated signal aligns with the contextual bandit interpretation outlined in Section 3. 

Pair-conditioned execution. Conditioned on a fixed pair 𝑧 𝑒 , the Trader interacts with a partially observable market environment at a finer temporal resolution. Its policy 

𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

(· | 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑒 ) (6) is implemented as a prompt-conditioned language model that maps the current textual observation context to a distribution over trad-ing actions. Unlike the Selector, the Trader’s prompt is allowed to adapt within the episode based on trajectory-level feedback, enabling rapid adjustment to pair-specific dynamics while preserv-ing the abstraction fixed by 𝑧 𝑒 . This asymmetric adaptation sched-ule—episodic updates for abstraction selection and intra-episode updates for execution—realizes the temporal separation assumed by the approximate bilevel interpretation in Section 3 without re-quiring explicit bilevel optimization constraints. 

Remark 4.1 (Language as Policy Representation). Through-out this paper, we treat a policy as the stochastic action distribution induced by querying a fixed large language model with a structured prompt and the current information state. Accordingly, prompt adap-tation corresponds to policy adaptation , while keeping model param-eters fixed. This provides a low-dimensional, semantically meaningful control surface that enables targeted updates at different temporal scales—episodic abstraction selection and intra-episode execution— without introducing cross-level gradient interference. All optimization procedures in Section 5 operate under this interpretation. 

## 5 Language-driven Policy Optimization 

We now describe how the hierarchical policies instantiated in Sec-tion 4.1 are optimized through prompt adaptation. Consistent with Remark 4.1, we treat prompt updates as policy updates and keep the underlying language model parameters fixed throughout training. Optimization proceeds at two temporal scales, corresponding to the low-level Trader and the high-level Selector. 

Notation. Within episode 𝑒 , the Trader prompt is updated across sub-episodes and is denoted by 𝜃 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑒

at the beginning of sub-episode 

𝑘 . We initialize 𝜃 (0) 

> 𝑒

:= 𝜃 ★ 

> 𝑒 −1

, where 𝜃 ★  

> 𝑒 −1

is the final Trader prompt 

Algorithm 1 Intra-Episode Textual Policy Optimization for Pair Trading (Trader) 

Require: Textual gradient operator ∇text ; prompt update operator 

⊕; initial Trader prompt 𝜃 0; episodes 𝐸  

> 1:

Initialize 𝜃 ★ 

> 0

← 𝜃 0 

> 2:

for 𝑒 = 1 to 𝐸 do  

> 3:

Receive selected pair 𝑧 𝑒  

> 4:

Initialize Trader prompt 𝜃 (0) 

> 𝑒

← 𝜃 ★  

> 𝑒 −1
> 5:

(Optional) Inject pair context 𝑧 𝑒 into the Trader promp-t/template  

> 6:

for 𝑘 = 1 to 𝐾 𝑒 do ⊲ Sub-episodes within episode 𝑒  

> 7:

𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 ← ∅  

> 8:

for 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑇 𝑒,𝑘 − 1 do  

> 9:

Observe 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘,𝑡  

> 10:

Sample 𝑎 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 tr   

> 𝜃 (𝑘 −1)
> 𝑒

(· | 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑒 ) 

> 11:

Execute 𝑎 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 and observe reward 𝑟 tr  

> 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡
> 12:

Append (𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 , 𝑟 tr  

> 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡

) to 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

𝑔 text  

> 𝑒,𝑘

← ∇ text (𝜃 (𝑘 −1) 

> 𝑒

, 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 ) ⊲ Stage 1: critique  

> 15:

𝜃 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑒

← 𝜃 (𝑘 −1) 

> 𝑒

⊕ 𝑔 text  

> 𝑒,𝑘

⊲ Stage 2: prompt update  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

𝜃 ★ 

> 𝑒

← 𝜃 (𝐾 𝑒 ) 

> 𝑒
> 18:

end for  

> 19:

return {𝜃 ★ 

> 𝑒

}𝐸 𝑒 =1

from the previous episode, and define 𝜃 ★ 

> 𝑒

:= 𝜃 (𝐾 𝑒 ) 

> 𝑒

after completing all 𝐾 𝑒 sub-episodes. The Selector prompt at the beginning of episode 

𝑒 is denoted by 𝜙 𝑒 . Throughout, 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

and 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

refer to the stochastic action distributions induced by a fixed LLM conditioned on prompts 

𝜃 and 𝜙 , respectively. 

## 5.1 Low-Level Optimization: Intra-Episode Textual Policy Optimization 

We optimize the low-level Trader policy 𝜋 tr  

> 𝜃

under a fixed selected asset pair 𝑧 𝑒 as summarized in Algorithm 1. Unlike the high-level Selector, which updates only across episodes, the Trader performs 

intra-episode prompt optimization to adapt its execution behavior to the selected pair. Each episode 𝑒 (e.g., one month) is divided into 𝐾 𝑒 sub-episodes indexed by 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 𝑒 (e.g., weekly intervals). Within each sub-episode, the Trader executes a trajectory using a fixed prompt 

𝜃 (𝑘 −1) 

> 𝑒

, after which the prompt may be updated using trajectory-level feedback before the next sub-episode begins. 

Trajectory generation. Executing 𝜋 tr   

> 𝜃 (𝑘 −1)
> 𝑒

during sub-episode 𝑘 

produces a trajectory 

𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 =  𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘, 0: 𝑇 𝑒,𝑘 , 𝑎 𝑒,𝑘, 0: 𝑇 𝑒,𝑘 −1, 𝑟 tr  

> 𝑒,𝑘, 0: 𝑇 𝑒,𝑘 −1

,

where 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 denotes the Trader observation at time 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 the action taken, and 𝑟 tr  

> 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡

the realized reward. Crucially, the Trader is conditioned on the fixed selected pair 𝑧 𝑒 throughout the episode, Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

Figure 1: Overview of the language-driven hierarchical pair trading framework. A high-level Selector LLM chooses asset pairs using aggregated price and semantic information, defining the trading context for a low-level Trader LLM that executes market-neutral actions based on short-term market observations. Both policies are prompt-conditioned language models with frozen weights and are improved through textual feedback, with the Trader adapting within episodes and the Selector updating across episodes based on cumulative performance. 

and actions are sampled as 

𝑎 𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 tr 

𝜃 (𝑘 −1)

> 𝑒



· | 𝑜 ℓ𝑒,𝑘,𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑒 



. (7) To improve execution performance, we apply an iterative, two-stage optimization procedure in prompt space at the end of each sub-episode (Fig. 2). 

Stage 1: Trajectory-level policy critique. A critic LLM is prompted with the executed trajectory 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 , including the sequence of obser-vations, actions, and realized rewards. Rather than producing a scalar evaluation, the critic analyzes the trajectory holistically and outputs a natural-language feedback signal 

𝑔 text 

𝑒,𝑘 ← ∇ text 



𝜃 (𝑘 −1)

𝑒 , 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 



, (8) where ∇text denotes a textual gradient operator implemented via a critic prompt template 𝑃 crit . This operator serves as a trajectory-conditioned policy improvement signal, specifying how the Trader’s decision rules should be modified under similar market conditions. In practice, we instantiate 

∇text 



𝜃 (𝑘 −1)

𝑒 , 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 



= LLM  𝑃 crit ; 𝜏 𝑒,𝑘 

 .

Stage 2: Prompt-based policy update. The textual feedback is in-corporated into the current Trader prompt to produce an updated prompt 

𝜃 (𝑘 )

𝑒 ← 𝜃 (𝑘 −1)

𝑒 ⊕ 𝑔 text 

𝑒,𝑘 , (9) where ⊕ denotes a prompt update operator implemented via an update prompt template 𝑃 upd . Concretely, we instantiate the update as 

𝜃 (𝑘 )

𝑒 = LLM 



𝑃 upd ; 𝜃 (𝑘 −1)

𝑒 , 𝑔 text 

𝑒,𝑘 



.

Repeating this procedure across sub-episodes yields a sequence of progressively adapted Trader policies within episode 𝑒 . The final prompt 𝜃 ★

𝑒 represents a Trader policy adapted to the selected pair 

𝑧 𝑒 and is carried forward to subsequent episodes. Trading 

> Environment
> Agent Prompt
> [Persona]
> You are a pair trading assistant ...
> [Policy]
> Enter trades when spread > ...
> [Output Rules]
> Output actions in a JSON ...
> Identify patterns and mistakes in action choices vs. context.
> Critic LLM
> [Critique Rules]
> Propose updates to the policy to address the critique
> Prompt Update
> [Update Rules]
> Prompt policy update
> Trajectory

Figure 2: Language-based policy optimization procedure. 

## 5.2 High-Level Optimization: Textual Policy Optimization 

The Selector operates at a coarse temporal scale and receives feed-back only after the Trader has completed tuning and execution Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou 

Algorithm 2 Textual Policy Optimization for Pair Selection (Selec-tor) 

Require: Initial Selector prompt 𝜙 0; textual gradient operator 

∇text ; prompt update operator ⊕ 

> 1:

Initialize 𝜙 1 ← 𝜙 0 

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

Observe high-level context 𝑜 ℎ 

> 4:

Sample pair 𝑧 ∼ 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(· | 𝑜 ℎ ) and rationale 𝜌 𝑒  

> 5:

Execute Trader conditioned on 𝑧 using Algorithm 1 and obtain payoff 𝑅 sel  

> 6:

Form experience 𝜁 ← ( 𝑜 ℎ, 𝑧, 𝜌, 𝑅 sel ) 

> 7:

𝑔 text ← ∇ text (𝜙, 𝜁 ) ⊲ Stage 1: critique  

> 8:

˜𝜙 ← 𝜙 ⊕ 𝑔 text ⊲ Stage 2: prompt update  

> 9:

Sample ˜𝑧 ∼ 𝜋 sel ˜𝜙 (· | 𝑜 ℎ ) 

> 10:

if ˜𝑧 ≠ 𝑧 then  

> 11:

𝜙 ← ˜𝜙  

> 12:

𝑧 ← ˜𝑧  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

until ˜𝑧 = 𝑧  

> 15:

return 𝜙 

under the selected pair. Accordingly, we formulate Selector opti-mization as iterative textual policy improvement in prompt space using delayed performance feedback (Algorithm 2). Given a high-level context 𝑜 ℎ summarizing recent historical price dynamics and semantic signals (e.g., news and sentiment) for the asset universe, the Selector samples a candidate pair 

𝑧 ∼ 𝜋 sel  

> 𝜙

(· | 𝑜 ℎ ),

and produces an accompanying natural-language rationale 𝜌 de-scribing the criteria used to justify the selection. Following pair selection, the Trader executes while condition-ing on 𝑧 and performing intra-episode adaptation as described in Section 5.1. This produces a scalar payoff signal 𝑅 sel reflecting the realized trading performance under the selected pair. We aggregate this information into a Selector experience record 

𝜁 = (𝑜 ℎ, 𝑧, 𝜌, 𝑅 sel ),

which is used to refine the Selector prompt. Specifically, we compute a textual critique 

𝑔 text ← ∇ text (𝜙, 𝜁 ), (10) and apply a prompt update 

˜𝜙 ← 𝜙 ⊕ 𝑔 text . (11) The updated prompt is then evaluated under the same context to produce a revised selection ˜𝑧 ∼ 𝜋 sel ˜𝜙 (· | 𝑜 ℎ ). If the revised prompt induces a different selection, the update is accepted; otherwise, the current prompt is retained. This procedure progressively refines the Selector prompt to improve pair selection quality under the given context. 

## 6 Experiments 

This section describes the overall experimental design and environ-ment setup for our method. 

## 6.1 Data 

Our experiments are conducted on historical data from the U.S. equity market. We consider a fixed universe of 𝑁 = 10 U.S. stocks chosen based on liquidity and news availability, and use daily ad-justed close prices obtained from the Yahoo Finance API. In addition to price data, we incorporate textual market information aligned to the same daily timestamps. For each trading day, we collect news articles and market-related text published before the market close from multiple sources, including OpenAI Web Search 4 1, Finnhub, NewsData5 2, and yfinance. These sources provide complementary coverage of formal financial news and informal market commen-tary. As textual content from different sources may overlap, we apply a daily summarization step using GPT5-nano to consolidate all collected text into a single compact representation [ 36 ]. We run all experiments using the official DeepSeek-V3.2 API for the un-derlying LLM, with a temperature of 0 to minimize randomness, unless otherwise stated. As the focus of this paper is generic nonparametric optimization, we did not conduct any hyperparameter search for the baseline or proposed algorithms, instead adopting default values and then using the same parameters throughout. Specifically, our method is tuned for 30 days starting 1st of January 2025, and tested until 1st of June 2025, using weekly trajectories. The Selector is treated as a contextual bandit and is therefore tuned using the context of the first 30 days, along with the traders performance during that time. For baseline pair-selection methods based on statistical rela-tionships, including GGR, correlation, and cointegration, we use a window of six months of historical price data to estimate stock relationships. This choice follows the standard practice described in the respective literature and ensures sufficient observations for sta-ble statistical estimations. For the TRIALS framework [ 19 ], which employs reinforcement learning, we allow two years of historical data for training. The longer training horizon is necessary to en-sure adequate exploration and convergence of the reinforcement learning agent. 

## 6.2 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate trading performance using four widely adopted finan-cial metrics: Annualized Return (AR), Sharpe Ratio (SR), Sortino Ratio (Sortino), Calmar Ratio (CR), Maximum Drawdown (MDD), Annualized Volatility (AV) and Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). These metrics jointly capture profitability, risk-adjusted perfor-mance, return variability, and downside risk. Details are provided in Appendix B. 

## 6.3 Baselines 

We compare our method with the following baselines: (1) GGR [ 15 ], which uses the minimum average Euclidean distance to calculate pairs, (2) Cointegration [ 45 ], which adopts the augmented Engle-Granger two-step cointegration test, and (3) Correlation [ 12 ], which selects the most correlated pair. We further benchmark TRIALS [19] for an RL-based alternative. 

> 1https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/tools-web-search?
> 2https://newsdata.io/ Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading

Table 1: Performance comparison of different pair-trading methods. Higher values are better for AR, SR, Sortino, Calmar, and CVaR, while lower values are better for MDD and AV. Model AR% ↑ SR ↑ Sortino ↑ CR ↑ MDD% ↓ AV% ↓ CVaR% ↑

GGR -9.550 -0.800 -1.557 -1.287 7.420 14.150 -1.540 Correlation/Cointegration 21.380 1.218 1.270 4.181 5.110 15.290 -2.370 TRIALS -4.700 -0.125 -0.550 -0.750 6.280 17.192 -4.800 Flat-LLM -7.690 -0.403 -0.450 -0.885 8.690 20.370 -3.270 Moira-selection -17.100 -1.750 -1.298 -2.315 7.390 11.680 -2.070 Moira-tuning 17.630 0.968 1.8469 2.4970 7.060 16.07 -1.552 

Moira 59.110 3.791 9.637 34.777 1.700 12.040 -0.800 

## 6.4 Experimental Results 

Our experimental design is structured to answer four questions: (i) how our method compares against statistical and RL-based base-lines; (ii) whether hierarchical decomposition is necessary; (iii) whether pair selection and execution contribute distinct perfor-mance gains; and (iv) whether prompt adaptation acts as a mean-ingful optimization process. We begin by evaluating overall trading performance, then an-alyze the role of hierarchical decomposition, disentangle pair se-lection from execution quality, and finally study robustness and optimization dynamics. 

Overall results. Table 1 presents our main results. Our fully tuned method achieves superior pair-trading performance compared to all baselines across all evaluation metrics. This performance is achieved using 1/5th of the formation data compared to statistical methods and 1/24th compared to TRIALS. Importantly, we observe that the untuned variant using the base prompts (Moira-tuning) while profitable, the untuned variant substantially underperforms the fully optimized model. Beyond cumulative performance, the equity curves in Fig. 3 reveal clear qualitative differences in trading behavior. The fully tuned model exhibits steady, monotonic capital growth with shallow and short-lived drawdowns, indicating consistent signal quality and robust risk control. In contrast, the untuned model fluctuates closely around the initial capital, suggesting frequent but largely uninformative trades whose gains and losses cancel out over time. This highlights that tuning is essential not only for improving returns but also for enabling stable and disciplined trading behavior. Compared to the correlation baseline, the fully tuned model exhibits a similar overall upward trend but with noticeably smoother growth and smaller drawdowns. This suggests that while the model exploits signals similarly to traditional pair-trading, tuning enables it to refine these signals and suppress noise, resulting in more stable and risk-efficient performance. 

Effect of Hierarchical Decomposition. To assess the necessity of hierarchical decision-making, we evaluate a non-hierarchical Flat-LLM policy that directly selects both the trading pair and position at every timestep. Despite having access to the same market infor-mation and LLM backbone as Moira, this approach performs poorly, yielding negative returns, elevated volatility, and large drawdowns. This failure highlights the difficulty of solving pair selection and 

Figure 3: Normalized equity curves and trade entry points for each strategy. Equity curves are normalized to 1 at the start of the evaluation period. Upward and downward triangles denote long and short entries, respectively. Strategies may select and trade different asset pairs over time, so the trade markers and resulting equity trajectories reflect positions in potentially different underlying pairs. 

trade execution jointly within a single decision process. Pair selec-tion requires long-horizon reasoning over inter-asset relationships, while trading demands short-horizon, reactive decision-making under uncertainty. By separating these concerns, the hierarchi-cal structure of Moira reduces the effective action space at each stage and enables each component to specialize at its appropriate temporal scale. 

Disentangling Pair Selection and Trade Execution. A central chal-lenge in evaluating hierarchical trading systems is disentangling the contribution of high-level pair selection from low-level trade execution. To clarify this distinction, we note that pair selection in our framework is performed once at the beginning of the evalua-tion period and remains fixed throughout testing. Consequently, all methods trade a fixed pair during evaluation, ensuring that performance differences do not arise from dynamic pair switching. We further perform two controlled analyses to isolate the effects of pair selection and execution quality. First, we evaluate standard baselines using the pair selected by the Moira Selector (AMZN/META) rather than the pairs identi-fied by the baselines themselves. Under this controlled setting, the baselines achieve the performance shown in Table 2. Notably, this substantially exceeds the baselines’ original per-formance on their statistically selected pairs, indicating that the Selector identifies economically meaningful opportunities beyond traditional correlation- or cointegration-based criteria. Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou 

Table 2: Baseline performance evaluated on the pair selected by the Moira Selector (AMZN/META). 

Metric Value AR (%) 37.08 SR 0.875 Sortino 1.245 MDD (%) 24.29 Second, we fix the Trader policy and evaluate performance across several candidate asset pairs. Results are reported in Table 3. 

Table 3: Performance of a fixed Trader policy across different candidate pairs. 

Pair AR (%) SR MDD (%) AMZN/META 59.09 2.46 7.87 GOOGL/MSFT 12.26 0.72 9.13 ADBE/AMZN 5.89 0.26 6.96 MSFT/NVDA -4.21 -0.16 13.26 AMZN/TSLA -17.10 -1.75 7.39 The large variance in performance under an identical Trader policy demonstrates that pair selection is itself a major determinant of profitability, independent of execution quality. Finally, combining the Selector’s chosen pair with the fully tuned Trader yields the strongest overall performance as seen in the over-all results paragraph. 

Ablation Study. We next examine whether LLMs contribute value in both stages of the hierarchical framework. To this end, we com-pare the full Moira model against two restricted variants shown in Table 1. Moira-selection replaces the LLM-based selector with correlation-based pair selection while retaining the tuned LLM trader. This variant performs poorly, yielding strongly negative re-turns and unfavorable risk-adjusted metrics. Despite using an adap-tive LLM trader, performance deteriorates when pairs are selected using traditional statistical criteria, indicating that correlation-based selection fails to identify opportunities suitable for effective downstream trading. This highlights the importance of semantically informed pair discovery. Moira-tuning disables trader adaptation while retaining LLM-based selection. This variant achieves positive returns and improved risk-adjusted performance compared to most baselines, demonstrating that semantically informed pair selection alone provides meaningful signal. However, its performance re-mains substantially below the full Moira model, with lower return, weaker Sharpe and Sortino ratios, and significantly higher draw-down. This indicates that static trading behavior cannot fully exploit the opportunities identified through semantic selection. Together, these ablations demonstrate that LLMs provide complementary benefits at both stages. LLM-based selection ensures that traded pairs exhibit meaningful relationships, while adaptive LLM-based tuning enables effective trade execution and risk management. 

Prompt Robustness and Initialization Sensitivity. To evaluate the robustness of prompt-based optimization to initialization effects, we conducted a prompt sensitivity analysis by varying the Trader’s initial prompt using multiple semantically equivalent paraphrased variants while keeping all other components fixed. This experiment evaluates whether performance improvements arise from brittle prompt engineering or from the optimization procedure itself. Across prompt variants, Moira maintains consistently positive performance with moderate variance, as shown in Table 4. 

Table 4: Prompt sensitivity analysis under paraphrased prompt initializations. 

Metric Mean ± Std AR 14 .39 ± 6.97 

SR 1.00 ± 0.50 

Sortino 1.13 ± 0.63 

Calmar 4.22 ± 2.86 

MDD 4.46 ± 2.43 

CVaR −1.84 ± 0.42 

These results suggest that while initialization influences final performance, the framework does not depend on a single highly engineered prompt template. Instead, prompt optimization consis-tently converges toward profitable trading behavior across seman-tically equivalent initializations, indicating that the optimization process itself contributes materially to performance. 

Learning curves. To investigate the learning dynamics of our method, we plot test performance after each trader update step 

𝑘 in Figure 4. We observe clear and consistent improvement as tuning progresses. Early update steps yield only modest gains in return and risk-adjusted performance, indicating limited ability to extract actionable signals. From update step 𝐾 = 4 onward, performance improves sharply across all metrics. Both annualized return and Sharpe ratio increase substantially, while maximum drawdown decreases, showing that later updates enhance prof-itability while controlling downside risk. By the final update steps, the metrics converge, suggesting that the prompt has reached a stable and effective representation of the trading objective. Analysis of prompt evolution shows that these improvements correspond to systematic changes in execution behavior. Early updates intro-duce basic entry and exit discipline, preventing premature exits and requiring stronger alignment between spread divergence and news catalysts. Subsequent updates refine entry timing by discour-aging momentum-chasing and encouraging catalyst-driven entries within recent price and news windows. Later updates introduce explicit risk management mechanisms, including trailing stops, par-tial profit-taking, and cooldown periods. These additions reduce overtrading, limit adverse exposure, and contribute to lower draw-downs and more stable returns. Finally, the policy responds more efficiently to strong news-driven opportunities while tightening risk controls, resulting in improved signal extraction and more consis-tent trend capture. Overall, prompt optimization induces structured policy improvement, progressively transforming the trader from reactive execution to disciplined, risk-aware decision-making. The full prompt evolution is provided in Appendix F. Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

Trading behaviour. Table 5 further clarifies the source of per-formance gains. With tuning, the strategy improves the payoff structure by increasing the average gain from winning trades while simultaneously reducing the magnitude and variability of losses, leading to a more favorable balance between risk and reward. This improvement reflects enhanced trade selection and risk manage-ment rather than simply a higher frequency of winning trades. In contrast, the untuned model exhibits more symmetric and volatile win–loss characteristics, which limits its ability to achieve consis-tent cumulative growth. By introducing stronger loss containment and more efficient capture of profitable opportunities, tuning pro-duces a return profile that is both more stable and more resilient, helping to explain the smoother equity trajectory and stronger overall performance observed earlier. 

Table 5: Comparison of trading performance metrics with and without tuning. 

Method Win Rate (%) Mean Win (%) Mean Loss (%) Profit Factor Untuned 46.67 1.44 ± 1.67 -0.98 ± 0.61 1.37 Tuned 48.15 1.69 ± 1.17 -0.48 ± 0.29 3.26 

Figure 4: Normalized metric performance across optimiza-tion steps. For visualization purposes, maximum drawdown (MDD) is sign-inverted and normalized, such that higher val-ues correspond to better performance. 

## 7 Conclusion 

This paper studies pair trading as a hierarchical sequential decision-making problem with evolving abstractions and delayed feedback, where perfor-mance degradation may arise from invalid abstractions, suboptimal exe-cution, or their interaction without explicit credit assignment signals. We propose a language-driven hierarchical reinforcement learning framework that represents both high-level pair selection and low-level trading execu-tion as prompt-conditioned large language models, optimized exclusively through trajectory- and episode-level prompt adaptation. This design sep-arates abstraction updates from execution adaptation and aligns learning dynamics with the structure of delayed feedback. Experiments on real-world U.S. equity market data show consistent improvements over statistical base-lines, reinforcement learning methods, and flat LLM-based agents. Ablation results confirm that both hierarchical decomposition and prompt adaptation are essential, suggesting that language can function as an effective policy representation for hierarchical control under ambiguous credit assignment. This work also has limitations. Our experiments focus on a relatively small asset universe and a specific market setting, and we do not study robustness under extreme regime shifts or adversarial market conditions. Moreover, while textual feedback provides a flexible and interpretable opti-mization signal, its theoretical properties remain an open question. Future work may extend this framework to larger asset universes, alternative fi-nancial tasks, or other hierarchical decision problems beyond trading. More broadly, we believe that language-driven hierarchical policy optimization of-fers a promising direction for sequential decision-making in domains where abstractions evolve, feedback is delayed, and explicit credit assignment is unavailable. 

## References 

[1] Sotiris Anagnostidis and Jannis Bulian. 2024. How susceptible are llms to influ-ence in prompts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11865 (2024). [2] Mahmut Bağcı and Pınar Kaya Soylu. 2025. The optimal threshold selection for high-frequency pairs trading via supervised machine learning algorithms. 

Computational Economics (2025), 1–29. [3] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al . 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 (2022). [4] William K Bertram. 2010. Analytic solutions for optimal statistical arbitrage trading. Physica A: Statistical mechanics and its applications 389, 11 (2010), 2234–2243. [5] Mario Carrasco Blázquez, Camilo Prado Román, et al . 2018. Pairs trading tech-niques: An empirical contrast. European Research on Management and Business Economics 24, 3 (2018), 160–167. [6] Andrew Brim. 2020. Deep reinforcement learning pairs trading with a double deep Q-network. In 2020 10th annual computing and communication workshop and conference (CCWC) . IEEE, 0222–0227. [7] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al . 2023. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning . PMLR, 287–318. [8] Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, et al . 2023. Open problems and fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15217 (2023). [9] Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E Hinton. 1992. Feudal reinforcement learning. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 5 (1992). [10] Han Ding, Yinheng Li, Junhao Wang, and Hang Chen. 2024. Large language model agent in financial trading: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06361 (2024). [11] Binh Do and Robert Faff. 2012. Are pairs trading profits robust to trading costs? 

Journal of Financial Research 35, 2 (2012), 261–287. [12] Robert J Elliott, John Van Der Hoek*, and William P Malcolm. 2005. Pairs trading. 

Quantitative Finance 5, 3 (2005), 271–276. [13] Saeid Fallahpour, Hasan Hakimian, Khalil Taheri, and Ehsan Ramezanifar. 2016. Pairs trading strategy optimization using the reinforcement learning method: a cointegration approach. Soft Computing 20, 12 (2016), 5051–5066. [14] George Fatouros, Kostas Metaxas, John Soldatos, and Dimosthenis Kyriazis. 2025. Can Large Language Models beat wall street? Evaluating GPT-4’s impact on financial decision-making with MarketSenseAI. Neural Computing and Applica-tions 37, 30 (2025), 24893–24918. [15] Evan Gatev, William N Goetzmann, and K Geert Rouwenhorst. 2006. Pairs trading: Performance of a relative-value arbitrage rule. The review of financial studies 19, 3 (2006), 797–827. [16] Minghong Geng, Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Lin Li, Xin Zhao, and Ah-Hwee Tan. 2025. L2m2: A hierarchical framework integrating large language model and multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[17] Minjia Guo, Jianhe Liu, Ziping Luo, and Xiao Han. 2024. Deep reinforcement learning for pairs trading: Evidence from China black series futures. International Review of Economics & Finance 93 (2024), 981–993. [18] Zihao Guo, Hanqing Jin, Jiaqi Kuang, Zhongmin Qian, and Jinghan Wang. 2025. Signature Decomposition Method Applying to Pair Trading. Journal of Futures Markets (2025). [19] Weiguang Han, Boyi Zhang, Qianqian Xie, Min Peng, Yanzhao Lai, and Jimin Huang. 2023. Select and trade: Towards unified pair trading with hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 4123–4134. [20] Yifan Hao, Xingyuan Pan, Hanning Zhang, Chenlu Ye, Rui Pan, and Tong Zhang. 2025. Understanding Overadaptation in Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Role of Ensemble Methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01901 (2025). Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou 

[21] Zican Hu, Wei Liu, Xiaoye Qu, Xiangyu Yue, Chunlin Chen, Zhi Wang, and Yu Cheng. 2025. Divide and Conquer: Grounding LLMs as Efficient Decision-Making Agents via Offline Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19761 (2025). [22] Peng Huang and Tianxiang Wang. 2016. On the profitability of optimal mean reversion trading strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05858 (2016). [23] Nicolas Huck and Komivi Afawubo. 2015. Pairs trading and selection methods: is cointegration superior? Applied Economics 47, 6 (2015), 599–613. [24] Sang-Ho Kim, Deog-Yeong Park, and Ki-Hoon Lee. 2022. Hybrid deep reinforce-ment learning for pairs trading. Applied Sciences 12, 3 (2022), 944. [25] Taewook Kim and Ha Young Kim. 2019. Optimizing the Pairs-Trading Strategy Using Deep Reinforcement Learning with Trading and Stop-Loss Boundaries. 

Complexity 2019, 1 (2019), 3582516. [26] Christopher Krauss. 2017. Statistical arbitrage pairs trading strategies: Review and outlook. Journal of Economic Surveys 31, 2 (2017), 513–545. [27] Christopher Krauss, Xuan Anh Do, and Nicolas Huck. 2017. Deep neural net-works, gradient-boosted trees, random forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500. European Journal of Operational Research 259, 2 (2017), 689–702. [28] Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. 2019. Learning multi-level hierarchies with hindsight. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations .[29] Xiang Li, Zhenyu Li, Chen Shi, Yong Xu, Qing Du, Mingkui Tan, and Jun Huang. 2024. Alphafin: Benchmarking financial analysis with retrieval-augmented stock-chain framework. In Proceedings of the 2024 joint international conference on computational linguistics, language resources and evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) . 773–783. [30] Alejandro Lopez-Lira and Yuehua Tang. 2023. Can chatgpt forecast stock price movements? return predictability and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07619 (2023). [31] Jing-You Lu, Hsu-Chao Lai, Wen-Yueh Shih, Yi-Feng Chen, Shen-Hang Huang, Hao-Han Chang, Jun-Zhe Wang, Jiun-Long Huang, and Tian-Shyr Dai. 2022. Structural break-aware pairs trading strategy using deep reinforcement learning. 

The Journal of Supercomputing 78, 3 (2022), 3843–3882. [32] Dat Mai. 2024. Stockgpt: A genai model for stock prediction and trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05101 (2024). [33] Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. 2018. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [34] Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-hwee Tan, and Chai Quek. 2021. Hierarchical reinforcement learning: A comprehensive survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 5 (2021), 1–35. [35] Eduardo Pignatelli, Johan Ferret, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Hado van Hasselt, Olivier Pietquin, and Laura Toni. 2023. A survey of temporal credit assignment in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01072 

(2023). [36] Lingfei Qian, Xueqing Peng, Yan Wang, Vincent Jim Zhang, Huan He, Hanley Smith, Yi Han, Yueru He, Haohang Li, Yupeng Cao, et al . 2025. When Agents Trade: Live Multi-Market Trading Benchmark for LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11695 (2025). [37] Molei Qin, Shuo Sun, Wentao Zhang, Haochong Xia, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. 2024. Earnhft: Efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning for high frequency trading. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 38. 14669–14676. [38] Hossein Rad, Rand Kwong Yew Low, and Robert Faff. 2016. The profitability of pairs trading strategies: distance, cointegration and copula methods. Quantitative Finance 16, 10 (2016), 1541–1558. [39] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023), 53728–53741. [40] Francesco Rotondi and Federico Russo. 2024. Machine Learning for Pairs Trading: a Clustering-based Approach. Available at SSRN 5080998 (2024). [41] Utsav Singh and Vinay P Namboodiri. 2023. Pear: Primitive enabled adap-tive relabeling for boosting hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06394 (2023). [42] Yufei Sun. 2025. A survey of statistical arbitrage pairs trading strategies with non-machine learning methods, 2016-2023. Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw Working Papers 2025-19 (2025). [43] Masood Tadi and Jiří Witzany. 2025. Copula-based trading of cointegrated cryptocurrency Pairs. Financial Innovation 11, 1 (2025), 40. [44] Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2017. Feudal networks for hier-archical reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning .PMLR, 3540–3549. [45] Ganapathy Vidyamurthy. 2004. Pairs Trading: quantitative methods and analysis .John Wiley & Sons. [46] Cheng Wang, Patrik Sandås, and Peter Beling. 2021. Improving pairs trading strategies via reinforcement learning. In 2021 International Conference on Applied Artificial Intelligence (ICAPAI) . IEEE, 1–7. [47] Saizhuo Wang, Hang Yuan, Lionel M Ni, and Jian Guo. 2024. Quantagent: Seeking holy grail in trading by self-improving large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03755 (2024). [48] Saizhuo Wang, Hang Yuan, Leon Zhou, Lionel Ni, Heung Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. 2025. Alpha-gpt: Human-ai interactive alpha mining for quantitative investment. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations . 196–206. [49] Yijia Xiao, Edward Sun, Di Luo, and Wei Wang. 2024. TradingAgents: Multi-agents LLM financial trading framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20138 (2024). [50] Guojun Xiong, Zhiyang Deng, Keyi Wang, Yupeng Cao, Haohang Li, Yangyang Yu, Xueqing Peng, Mingquan Lin, Kaleb E Smith, Xiao-Yang Liu, et al . 2025. FLAG-Trader: Fusion LLM-Agent with Gradient-based Reinforcement Learning for Financial Trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11433 (2025). [51] Fucui Xu and Shan Tan. 2020. Dynamic portfolio management based on pair trad-ing and deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 3rd International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Systems . 50–55. [52] Hongshen Yang and Avinash Malik. 2024. Reinforcement Learning Pair Trading: A Dynamic Scaling Approach. Journal of Risk and Financial Management 17, 12 (2024), 555. [53] Hongyang Yang, Boyu Zhang, Neng Wang, Cheng Guo, Xiaoli Zhang, Likun Lin, Junlin Wang, Tianyu Zhou, Mao Guan, Runjia Zhang, et al . 2024. Finrobot: An open-source ai agent platform for financial applications using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14767 (2024). [54] Yi Yang, Yixuan Tang, and Kar Yan Tam. 2023. Investlm: A large language model for investment using financial domain instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13064 (2023). [55] Yangyang Yu, Haohang Li, Zhi Chen, Yuechen Jiang, Yang Li, Jordan W Suchow, Denghui Zhang, and Khaldoun Khashanah. 2025. Finmem: A performance-enhanced llm trading agent with layered memory and character design. IEEE Transactions on Big Data (2025). [56] Yangyang Yu, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li, Zhiyang Deng, Yuechen Jiang, Yupeng Cao, Zhi Chen, Jordan Suchow, Zhenyu Cui, Rong Liu, et al . 2024. Fincon: A synthesized llm multi-agent system with conceptual verbal reinforcement for enhanced financial decision making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 137010–137045. [57] Wentao Zhang, Lingxuan Zhao, Haochong Xia, Shuo Sun, Jiaze Sun, Molei Qin, Xinyi Li, Yuqing Zhao, Yilei Zhao, Xinyu Cai, et al . 2024. A multimodal founda-tion agent for financial trading: Tool-augmented, diversified, and generalist. In 

Proceedings of the 30th acm sigkdd conference on knowledge discovery and data mining . 4314–4325. 

## A Stock Universe 

Our experiments are conducted on a fixed universe of 10 U.S. equities se-lected based on high liquidity, consistent news coverage, and representation across multiple sectors. This selection ensures sufficient trading activity for realistic execution and availability of textual information for language-driven policy optimization. Table 6 lists the full set of stocks used in our experiments. 

Table 6: Stock universe used in experiments 

Ticker Company Name Category AAPL Apple Inc. Consumer Electronics ADBE Adobe Inc. Software AMZN Amazon.com, Inc. E-Commerce BMRN BioMarin Pharm. Inc. Biotechnology CRM Salesforce, Inc. Enterprise Software GOOGL Alphabet Inc. Internet Services META Meta Platforms, Inc. Internet Services MSFT Microsoft Corporation Enterprise Software NVDA NVIDIA Corporation Semiconductors TSLA Tesla, Inc. Automotive 

## B Evaluation Metric Details 

Annualized Return (AR). Annualized return measures the average yearly growth rate of the portfolio over the evaluation period. It reflects the overall Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

profitability of the trading strategy and enables fair comparison across experiments with different time horizons. 

Sharpe Ratio (SR). The Sharpe Ratio evaluates risk-adjusted perfor-mance by comparing the portfolio’s excess return to its return volatility. It is defined as 

SR = 𝑅 𝑝 − 𝑟 𝑓 

𝜎 𝑝 

,

where 𝑅 𝑝 denotes the average portfolio return, 𝑟 𝑓 is the risk-free rate, and 𝜎 𝑝 represents the standard deviation of returns. Higher Sharpe ratios indicate better risk-adjusted performance. 

Annualized Volatility (AV). Annualized volatility quantifies the vari-ability of returns over a year. It is computed by scaling the standard deviation of daily returns (DV) by the square root of the number of trading days: 

AV = DV × √252 .

This metric captures the degree of return fluctuations and reflects the overall risk level of the strategy. 

Maximum Drawdown (MDD). Maximum drawdown measures the largest observed decline from a historical peak to a subsequent trough in portfolio value: 

MDD = max 

 𝑉 peak − 𝑉 trough 

𝑉 peak 



.

Lower MDD values indicate reduced downside risk and greater robustness of the trading strategy. 

Sortino Ratio (Sortino). The Sortino Ratio is a downside-risk-adjusted performance metric that improves upon the Sharpe Ratio by penalizing only negative return volatility. It is defined as 

Sortino = 𝑅 𝑝 − 𝑟 𝑓 

𝜎 𝑑 

,

where 𝑅 𝑝 denotes the average portfolio return, 𝑟 𝑓 is the risk-free rate, and 

𝜎 𝑑 represents the standard deviation of negative (downside) returns. Higher Sortino ratios indicate better performance with respect to downside risk. 

Calmar Ratio (CR). The Calmar Ratio evaluates risk-adjusted return relative to maximum drawdown, providing insight into the strategy’s return efficiency under worst-case losses. It is defined as 

CR = AR MDD ,

where AR is the annualized return and MDD is the maximum drawdown. Higher Calmar ratios indicate superior return generation relative to draw-down risk. 

Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). Conditional Value at Risk mea-sures the expected loss given that returns fall below a specified percentile threshold, typically at the 95% confidence level. It captures tail risk beyond the Value at Risk (VaR) and is defined as 

CVaR 𝛼 = E[𝑅 | 𝑅 ≤ VaR 𝛼 ],

where 𝛼 denotes the confidence level and 𝑅 represents portfolio returns. Lower CVaR values indicate reduced exposure to extreme downside losses. 

## C Cost Analysis 

We analyze the computational cost of the framework in terms of language model token usage. In practice, the dominant cost arises from processing contextual market information, primarily news summaries, rather than prompt templates or generated outputs. This highlights an important property of the framework: optimization overhead is relatively small compared to the cost of ingesting large contex-tual information streams. Consequently, future efficiency improvements are likely to benefit more from context compression and retrieval optimization than from reducing prompt adaptation complexity. 

Table 7: Approximate token usage during optimization and evaluation. 

Component Calls Tokens / Call Total Tokens Trader (action) 30 ∼11.6k ∼347k Trader (critic) 6 ∼12.2k ∼73k Selector (action) 3 ∼57.6k ∼173k Selector (critic) 3 ∼57.8k ∼173k 

## D Baseline Prompts 

This appendix provides the exact prompts used for each of the hierarchical agents in the framework. We present each prompt verbatim below. 

## D.1 Pair Selector                                                                

> You are apair trading assistant selecting two distinct tickers to trade as apair . Use the provided recent prices and recent news to choose apair that is likely to move together and mean -revert if they diverge . Return ONLY valid JSON with no markdown or extra text . Schema : {" pair ": [" TICKER1 ", " TICKER2 "] , " rationale ": " short reason "} Rules : -Choose exactly two distinct tickers from allowed_symbols . -Use uppercase tickers . -Keep rationale to 2sentences or less .

## D.2 Pair Trader                                                                                                     

> You are apair trading assistant selecting the next action for an existing pair . Use the provided recent prices , recent news , current position state , and any open positions ( entry_price and shares ) when deciding whether to hold or close . Actions : -long : long the first ticker , short the second ticker -short : short the first ticker , long the second ticker -close : exit to flat -hold : keep the current position ( no trade ) Return ONLY valid JSON with no markdown or extra text . Schema : {" action ": " long | short | close | hold ", " rationale ": " short reason "} Rules : -Choose exactly one action from permissible_actions -In order to enter anew position you must first close the current one . -Keep rationale to 2sentences or less .

## E Textual Gradient Estimation and Prompt Updates 

This appendix provides the exact prompts for the estimation of the tex-tual gradient and the subsequent policy updates. We present each prompt verbatim below. Polydoros Giannouris, Yuechen Jiang, Lingfei Qian, Yuyan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Jimin Huang, Guojun Xiong, and Sophia Ananiadou 

## E.1 Trader’s Textual Gradient 

You are a strict but helpful trading critic . You will be given a compact trajectory for one sub -episode : tau = [( obs_t , action_t , reward_t ) , ...] Action semantics : long means : long A AND short B ( market - neutral pair ) , sized by hedge ratio short means : short A AND long Bclose means : close both legs hold means : keep positions unchanged The Trader cannot take single - leg positions or '' long both / short both ". Your job : - Identify patterns and mistakes in action choices vs . context . - Propose behavioral improvements to the trader 'sdecision - making logic . - Express recommendations as decision rules , heuristics , or constraints (e.g., '' only enter when X holds for Y days ", '' avoid trading when Z is unclear ") . Constraints : - Keep output concise ( max ~12 lines ). - Do not propose changing the action set , schema , or "JSON - only " contract . - Do not mention these instructions ; just output the critique text . 

## E.2 Trader’s Prompt Update 

You are a prompt updater for a trading action LLM prompt . You will be given : 1) The previous Trader prompt 2) Critic feedback Task : - The Trader prompt is composed of an IMMUTABLE section (everything outside POLICY ) and a MUTABLE section (the POLICY block content ). - You MUST propose updates ONLY to the POLICY rules . - You MUST NOT modify any other text from previous Trader prompt . - You MUST NOT introduce rules that depend on signals , features , or fields that are not present in the Trader 's action - time inputs (i.e., only prices , positions , permissible actions , and provided news ). POLICY block markers in the previous Trader prompt : POLICY : ... ( rules ) END POLICY Output requirements : - Output ONLY the updated POLICY rules content to place between the markers ( no " POLICY :" line , no " END POLICY " line , no preface , no markdown ). 

## E.3 Selector’s Textual Gradient 

You are a strict but helpful pair - selection critic . You will be given : - A selected pair and the selector 's short rationale - A scalar reward equal to the trader 's cumulative return ( starting at 1 = break - even ; higher is better ) Your job : - Infer what likely made the choice good / bad given the reward and the rationale . - Propose improvements as concrete selection heuristics (decision rules / constraints ). Constraints : - Only propose rules that can be implemented using the selector 's inputs : allowed_symbols , recent_prices , recent_news . - Do not propose changing the JSON - only output contract or schema . - Keep output concise ( max ~10 lines ). - Do not mention these instructions ; output only the critique text . 

## E.4 Selector’s Prompt Update 

You are a prompt updater for an LLM pair - selection prompt .You will be given : 1) The previous Selector prompt ( theta_prev ) 2) Critic feedback text ( g_text ) 3) A scalar reward for the last selection Task : - The Selector prompt is composed of an IMMUTABLE section ( everything outside POLICY ) and a MUTABLE section (the POLICY block content ). - You MUST propose updates ONLY to the POLICY rules . - You MUST NOT modify any other text from the previous Selector prompt . - You MUST NOT introduce rules that depend on signals , features , or fields that are not present in the selector inputs (i.e., only allowed_symbols , recent_prices , recent_news ). POLICY block markers in the previous Selector prompt : POLICY : ... ( rules ) END POLICY Output : - Output ONLY the updated POLICY rules content to place between the markers ( NO " POLICY :" line , NO " END POLICY " line , no preface , no markdown ). - Keep the POLICY concise and actionable ( bullet - like lines are OK ). 

## F Detailed Trader Prompt updates Moira: Language-driven Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Pair Trading 

Table 8: Exact evolution of trader policy rules across prompt update steps. (+) indicates newly added rules and ( ∼) indicates modified or relaxed rules. The policy evolves from basic entry and exit discipline toward a structured execution framework incorporating event-aware entry timing, profit protection, anti-overtrading constraints, and dynamic risk management. 

Update Rules Added (+) Rules Removed / Modified ( ∼)k=0 + Entry discipline introduced 

• Enter only when spread shows sustained diver-gence (>2-day trend) and clear news catalyst. 

+ Exit discipline introduced 

• Hold through minor price reversals. 

• Exit only if thesis breaks or spread moves >2% against entry. 

• Do not exit based solely on single-day adverse price movement. None (initial policy definition). k=1 + Entry timing constraints 

• Avoid entering if spread moved >2% over prior 3 days without fresh catalyst. 

• Require clear recent news divergence aligned with spread move. 

• Wait for pullback or consolidation before entry if spread trending. None. k=2 + Event risk management 

• Avoid entering or adding to positions before ma-jor scheduled events (e.g., earnings) if spread al-ready moved >1.5%. 

+ Profit protection mechanisms 

• Introduced trailing stop: exit if spread retraces 1.5% after exceeding 3% unrealized profit. 

• Introduced partial profit-taking: close 50% of po-sition after >3% gain in 3 days. 

• Introduced maximum holding period guideline (approximately 5 trading days) for news-driven trades. None. k=3 + Anti-overtrading and execution stability rules 

• Do not re-enter same pair and direction for at least 2 trading days unless a major new catalyst emerges. 

• Require significant change in fundamental dri-vers (e.g., news sentiment or technical break-down) before re-establishing a closed position. None. k=4 + Improved exit timing and dynamic profit manage-ment 

• Reassess thesis daily; if momentum stalls after 3–5 days in profit, consider exiting even if profit threshold not reached. 

+ Signal quality filter 

• Avoid entering positions when both stocks ex-hibit similar sentiment; require clear divergence. 

∼ Modified holding period rule: 

• Replaced fixed maximum holding period guide-line with dynamic thesis-based reassessment af-ter 3–5 days. k=5 + Faster entry response to strong catalysts 

• Enter immediately after clear catalyst-driven news divergence aligned with spread movement, without waiting for prolonged sustained diver-gence confirmation. 

+ Tighter profit protection and earlier risk control 

• Lowered trailing stop activation threshold from 3% to 2%. 

• Lowered partial profit-taking threshold from 3% to 2%. 

• Tightened profit protection to lock gains earlier in strong moves. 

∼ Relaxed sustained divergence requirement: 

• Sustained divergence confirmation (>2 days) no longer strictly required when strong catalyst-driven news divergence exists. 

∼ Modified profit protection thresholds: 

• Trailing stop trigger reduced (3% → 2%) 

• Partial profit threshold reduced (3% → 2%)