Title: 5911_DLoFT_Gradient_Decoupled_.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=5ZDT1dxojA

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# DLoFT: Gradient-Decoupled Fine-Tuning for Generalizable Long Chain-of-Thought Reasoning 

Sitong Wu 1, ∗ Haoru Tan 2, ∗ Jingyao Li 1 Shaofeng Zhang 3

Xiaojuan Qi 2, † Bei Yu 1† Jiaya Jia 1,4, †

> 1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2The University of Hong Kong 

> 3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 

# Abstract 

Long chain-of-thought (LongCoT) has emerged as a powerful reasoning paradigm for enabling large language models (LLMs) to solve complex tasks through a systematic and thorough thinking phase. Although supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on high-quality LongCoT traces has proven effective to activate LongCoT abilities, we find that models trained in this way tend to overfit problem-specific knowledge and heuristics, leading to degraded out-of-distribution performance. To address this issue, we propose a Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT) algorithm, which enables the model to learn generalizable LongCoT reasoning abilities while preventing overfitting to the reasoning content with problem-specific information. The key idea is to decouple the gradient into two orthogonal components: 1) a paradigm-relevant gradient corresponding to the general LongCoT paradigm and 2) a content-relevant gradient reflecting the problem-specific information, where only the former gradient is used to update model parameters. Specifically, by leveraging the unique two-phase composition (thinking and solution) of the Long-CoT response, our gradient decoupling mechanism isolates the content-relevant gradient via a projection operation and separates the paradigm-relevant gradi-ent through orthogonalization. Our DLoFT ensures the model concentrate on internalizing the LongCoT paradigm rather than memorizing problem-specific knowledge and heuristics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DLoFT significantly improves the generalization behavior of LongCoT abilities compared to SFT while maintaining strong in-distribution performance. The code is available at https://github.com/dvlab-research/DLoFT .

# 1 Introduction 

Recent large language models (LLMs), for example, OpenAI o1-o3 [ 1– 3], have achieved remarkable breakthroughs in difficult reasoning tasks [4–6]. A key technique driving these advances is the long chain-of-thought (LongCoT) reasoning paradigm, which encourages models to conduct a systematic and thorough thinking process involving reflection on intermediate steps, error correction, feasibility assessment, and exploration of alternative ideas. Following these breakthroughs, the community has attempted to replicate such LongCoT reasoning abilities, which remains a significant challenge. Recent efforts typically rely on imitating high-quality LongCoT traces via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [ 7– 9] or conducting costly reinforcement learning (RL) on tasks with deterministic final answer [ 10 ]. Notably, existing works are predominantly focused 

> ∗

Equal contribution (stone-wu@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hrtan@eee.hku.hk) 

> †

Corresponding author 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Figure 1: Illustration of the overfitting problem. We train the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 11 ] on OpenR1-Math-5K LongCoT dataset [ 12 ] using SFT and our DLoFT respectively, and test on AIME24 math competition [ 4 ] as in-domain evaluation and MedQA [ 13 ] as out-domain evaluation. (a) shows the change in test accuracy during training, and (b) shows the percentage of the model’s response to the test data containing LongCoT behavior as training progresses. The yellow dotted line indicates the turning point where out-domain performance begins to degrade continuously. Please refer to Sec. 3 for more analysis of this overfitting problem. on narrow fields, such as competition-level mathematics [ 4 ], code generation [ 6], and PhD-level science question answering [ 5 ]. Considering the data sparsity and proprietary for some fields, it is non-trivial and impractical to construct a large-scale dataset with comprehensive knowledge coverage, and it is extremely expensive to annotate the high-quality LongCoT response. Consequently, a practical question arises: Can the LongCoT reasoning ability acquired from specific fields ( e.g. ,mathematics) effectively generalize to unseen fields ( e.g. , engineering, economics, literature, etc)? 

Observations. To investigate this, we conducted a series of empirical studies as Figure 1. Our experiments reveal a surprisingly poor generalization performance on novel fields. By analyzing the training dynamics, we found that the out-of-distribution performance degradation arises from the overfitting to problem-specific knowledge and heuristics present in the training data. In addition, we have tried common overfitting mitigation strategies, such as early stopping. Although simply applying early stopping produces a slight improvement in unseen fields, it simultaneously leads to insufficient learning in seen fields and does not always exhibit the LongCoT paradigm. We attribute this to the inherent coupling of general LongCoT reasoning abilities with the problem-specific knowledge and heuristics in supervised fine-tuning. These findings underscore the necessity for a training algorithm capable of decoupling problem-specific knowledge from underlying LongCoT reasoning abilities. 

Our Approach. In this paper, we propose a novel training algorithm, named Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT), which enables the model to master the generalizable LongCoT reasoning paradigm while avoiding overfitting to reasoning content. The central idea is to filter out the gradient component induced from problem-specific information via a gradient decoupling mechanism. Specifi-cally, in each training iteration, we first calculate the full gradient gfull of the entire LongCoT response, which blends the influence of two learning signals: one is the LongCoT reasoning paradigm, and the other is the knowledge and skills required to solve the problem. Then, we decouple the full gradient 

gfull into two orthogonal components: (1) the paradigm-relevant gradient gpar exclusively capturing the general LongCoT reasoning paradigm, (2) the content-relevant gradient gcon corresponding to the problem-specific knowledge and heuristics. A key insight of our decoupling mechanism is that the inherent two-phase structure of LongCoT responses (a thinking phase followed by a solution phase) naturally facilitates the disentanglement of these two gradient components. The thinking phase captures both LongCoT reasoning paradigm and problem-specific information, whereas the solution phase only encodes the latter (see Sec. 4.1 and 4.2 for more explanation). Therefore, by comparing the gradients induced by the full LongCoT response and the solution phase alone, we can isolate the gradient gcon using a projection operation and separate gpar via an orthogonalization operation (elaborated in Sec. 4.3). Finally, the model is updated using only the paradigm-relevant gradient com-2ponent. This ensures the model focuses on internalizing the LongCoT paradigm without memorizing problem-specific knowledge and heuristics. The overall algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1. We compare our DLoFT with SFT on the challenging benchmarks in 17 diverse domains for both generalist and domain-specific LLMs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that: (1) our DLoFT effectively mitigates the overfitting problem of SFT and learns stronger generalizable LongCoT reasoning ability. For example, it significantly outperforms SFT by an average of +16.4 points on out-domains and has a notable advantage of +11.5 points on in-domains. (2) As a cold-start stage for RL, our DLoFT can free the cold-start from the dependence on in-domain LongCoT data, and serves as a stronger foundation for subsequent RL, amplifying the outcome of RL. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 LLM Reasoning from CoT to LongCoT 

Reasoning is a core capability of large language models (LLMs), reflecting their ability to address complex real-world problems. Since 2022, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [ 14 ] has enhanced the ability of LLM on reasoning tasks (like mathematics [ 15 ] and basic programming [ 16 ]) by encouraging them to generate intermediate steps before deriving a final answer. While LLM with CoT reasoning paradigm still struggles with highly complex reasoning tasks like competition-level math [ 4], coding competitions [ 6], and PhD-level science QA [ 5 ]. For example, GPT-4o [ 17 ] only achieves 13.4% accuracy on the well-known math competition AIME24 [ 4]. The release of OpenAI’s o1 model [ 1 ]broke this status and made great progress in these tasks. The underlying reason for o1’s success is the shift in the reasoning paradigm from a short-formed CoT to a more comprehensive Long Chain-of-Thought (LongCoT), which scales up the inference computation of LLMs by engaging in a deeper thinking phase before delivering the final answer. Unlike a deterministic solution, this thinking process allows the model to freely and thoroughly explore a given problem, including several typical characteristics: (1) exploring different ideas, (2) backtracking to prior steps if the current step is hopeless, (3) reflecting the correctness of previous steps, and (4) correcting errors. 

2.2 Techniques for Enabling LongCoT Reasoning 

Following the breakthrough of o1 [ 1], the community has attempted to cultivate the LongCoT reasoning abilities for LLMs. These efforts can be categorized into four groups: 

Inducing Reflection via Inference-Time Intervention. The first line of work encourages the model to engage in self-reflection through an inference-time intervention mechanism. For example, [ 7]demonstrated that simply inserting the token “Wait” into the model’s current reasoning trace can effectively prompt the model to reflect on its current step. [ 18 ] further revealed that this self-reflection behavior is already acquired during the pre-training phase, which offers a plausible explanation for the effectiveness of inference-time intervention techniques. However, inference-time intervention is less practical because it relies on manual intervention to trigger reflective behavior rather than spontaneously performing self-reflection and correction when necessary (like o1 [1]). 

Imitate High-Quality LongCoT Responses via Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT). Inspired by knowledge distillation [ 19 , 20 ], the most straightforward way to enable LongCoT abilities is fine-tuning the LLM to imitate the high-quality LongCoT reasoning traces, which can be curated in two ways: one is to collect the responses from existing models with strong LongCoT abilities ( e.g. ,DeepSeek-R1 [ 10 ] and QwQ [ 21 , 22 ], etc.), the other is to manually synthesize the tree search sampling trajectories of CoT model into the LongCoT form [ 23 , 24 ]. Existing studies narrowly focus on a few topics for both training and evaluation, including competition-level mathematics [ 4 ], code generation [ 6], and PhD-level science question answering [ 5]. In contrast, our experiments reveal that SFT on LongCoT data with narrow topics leads to poor generalization on diverse novel topics, which is caused by the fact that the model is prone to overfitting the problem-specific knowledge and skills involved in the training data. To address this issue, we propose a Decoupled Fine-Tuning (DLoFT) algorithm for learning generalizable LongCoT reasoning, which decouples the gradient exclusively corresponding to general LongCoT reasoning paradigm and the gradient caused by problem-specific information. 3LongCoT Emerges through Zero Reinforcement Learning (Zero-RL). DeepSeek-R1-Zero [ 10 ]first found that LongCoT reasoning abilities can naturally emerge through reinforcement learning (RL) with rule-based rewards for a base LLM, referred to as Zero-RL training. In particular, they experimented on a 671B model [ 25 ] and demonstrated that the model naturally learned to solve reasoning tasks with more thinking time (increased average response length) and to reflect using an anthropomorphic tone (called “aha moment”). Subsequent works [ 26 – 28 ] have attempted to reproduce its performance and emergence phenomenon by demystifying its proprietary training data and settings. 

Reinforcement Learning (RL) with LongCoT Cold-start. Despite the success of DeepSeek-R1-Zero[ 10 ], recent studies [ 29 ] have found that Zero-RL does not always stably emerge LongCoT reasoning paradigm, particularly in terms of extended reasoning length and complexity. A SFT cold-start phase on LongCoT-style data is essential to first instill the LongCoT reasoning paradigm in the model before applying RL for further enhancement. This cold-start phase is proven to make further RL improvement easier [ 10 , 29 ]. Under this “RL with Cold-start” training scheme, our DLoFT algorithm can effectively replace the SFT in the cold-start phase. Experiments show that RL with our DLoFT cold-start achieves better generalization and superior RL gains compared to SFT counterpart. 

# 3 Overfitting Problem Investigation 

From Figure 1, we can observe that supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on LongCoT data involving a few specific domains leads to notable performance drops on 11 out-domain benchmarks, with degradations ranging from -1.9 to -16.0 points. This clearly highlights the poor generalization behavior of standard LongCoT Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT). To further investigate the underlying reason for this out-of-distribution generalization problem, we monitor two key metrics throughout the training process on both in-domain and out-domain benchmark: (1) the accuracy; (2) the percentage of model’s response to the test data that exhibits LongCoT behavior. In particular, we use GPT-4o-mini API to detect whether the model response contains LongCoT behaviors such as reflection, error correction, and exploration of new ideas. As shown in Figure 1, although the accuracy on the in-domain benchmark steadily improves during training, the accuracy on the out-domain benchmark initially increases slightly (from 55.3 to 57.0) and then begins to consistently decline after 250 step, eventually dropping to 46.9. This trend suggests that the out-of-distribution performance degradation is due to the model overfitting to problem-specific knowledge and heuristics present in the training data. In addition, common overfitting mitigation strategy, such as early stopping (stopping training before out-domain performance degradation), has been shown to be ineffective. Although simply applying early stopping can prevent a performance degradation on out-domain benchmark, it leads to both the limited performance gains and insufficient learning on the LongCoT reasoning paradigm. As shown in Figure 1(a), if training is stopped early at step 250 (indicated by the yellow dashed line), we forfeit approximately 7 points on the accuracy of in-domain benchmark. Simultaneously, as Figure 1(b), only 3.3% of the in-domain test examples exhibit LongCoT behavior at the early stopping moment, indicating that the model has not yet sufficiently internalized the LongCoT reasoning paradigm. These observations underscore a key challenge: naive supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is prone to overfit to problem-specific knowledge and heuristics present in the training data, rather than internalizing a generalizable LongCoT reasoning paradigm. In contrast, our DLoFT not only ensures a steady increase in in-domain and out-domain performance (as Figure 1(a)), but also demonstrates faster learning of the LongCoT paradigm (see Figure 1(b)). 

# 4 Method 

In this section, we introduce our Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT) algorithm, which enhances the generalizability of learned LongCoT reasoning abilities while preventing overfitting to specific problems in training data. First, we review the characteristics of LongCoT data in Sec. 4.1, providing the necessary background for understanding the motivation and algorithm. Then, in Sec. 4.2, we discuss the challenges in LongCoT fine-tuning, and highlight our motivation for leveraging the unique structure of LongCoT data. Finally, we elaborate our algorithm in Sec. 4.3. 44.1 Preliminary: LongCoT Reasoning Format 

The LongCoT-style response is structured into two phases: (1) Phase-1 : a systematic thinking 

phase that includes analyzing problems, summarizing findings, exploring new ideas, reflecting on correctness, and correcting errors. (2) Phase-2 : a solution phase that presents a deterministic step-by-step solution derived from the successful attempts during the thinking phase. This two-phase structure in LongCoT enables a more thorough, exploratory and reflective reasoning process, in contrast to the conventional CoT which typically follows a single-phase structure focused solely on step-by-step reasoning. Figure 5 in Appendix provides an example of LLM’s response under LongCoT Reasoning. 

4.2 Motivation 

LongCoT fine-tuning aims to enable the model to adopt LongCoT reasoning paradigm on problem solving: first engaging in deliberate thinking to make a deep and structured exploration of the problem, and then synthesizing a deterministic solution based on the successful reasoning traces. The mainstream training objective is to directly imitate high-quality LongCoT responses on thousands of representative reasoning problems [ 7, 8]. This optimization objective inherently couples two types of learning signals: (1) reasoning paradigm , i.e. , how to structure thoughts, analyze problem, reflect on previous steps, correct errors, assess feasibility, backtrack to prior step, and brainstorm alternative ideas; (2) reasoning content , i.e. , the relevant knowledge and skills required for solving the problem. Typically, models require more training iterations to internalize strong and stable LongCoT abilities due to the complexity of the LongCoT reasoning process. However, this increases the risk of overfitting — not to the reasoning paradigm itself, but to the problem-specific knowledge and skills covered in the training data. As a result, the model learns to reason effectively within seen topics, but struggles to generalize to unseen ones. To address this issue, we propose encouraging the model to focus on learning the LongCoT reasoning paradigm, rather than memorizing problem-specific knowledge or heuristics. Concretely, we decouple the gradients into two orthogonal components: one corresponding to problem-specific content and the other capturing exclusive LongCoT reasoning paradigm. Only the latter gradient component is adopted to update model parameters. A key insight of our work is that the unique two-phase structure of LongCoT responses naturally facilitates the decoupling of paradigm-relevant and content-relevant gradients. As described in Sec. 4.1, the thinking phase encodes both the reasoning paradigm and problem-specific content, while the solution phase reflects only the latter. By comparing the gradients induced by the full LongCoT response and the solution part alone, we can isolate the gradient component that exclusively corresponds to the LongCoT reasoning paradigm. The algorithm details are elaborated in the following sub-section. 

4.3 Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning 

This section provides a detailed introduction to our training methodology designed to enhance the long reasoning abilities of large language models, which we name Gradient-Decoupled Fine-Tuning. Our core idea is a gradient decoupling mechanism that explicitly separates the supervisory signals related to long reasoning from those that are purely problem-specific. This approach fundamentally differs from conventional Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), where the model’s learning objective is typically to replicate or memorize the provided annotated long reasoning process and the final answer. The overall procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. The core of the entire optimization algorithm consists of the following three sequential steps, used for gradient decoupling and parameter updating. 

Step 1: Compute the Full Response Gradient 

For each training example in the mini-batch, represented as a tuple (Pi, T i, S i), where Pi denotes the problem, Ti signifies the exploratory thinking process, and Si indicates the deterministic solution, we input the question Pi into the model θ. We then compute the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss over the complete Long Chain-of-Thought (LongCoT) response, represented as Ti ⊕ Si, where ⊕

denotes the concatenation of the two text components. Formally, the gradient gfull of the averaged 5Algorithm 1: Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT) 

Input: Training dataset D, initial model parameters θ, learning rate η, maximum iterations T , batch size B

for t = 1 to T do 

Sample a mini-batch {(Pi, T i, S i)}B 

> i=1

from D, where 

Pi : the i-th problem 

Ti : the exploratory thinking process in LongCoT response for Pi

Si : the deterministic solution in LongCoT response for Pi

;

Step 1: Compute the Full Response (Ti ⊕ Si) Gradient // ⊕: concatenation 

Lfull = − 1

> B

PB

> i=1

P|Ti⊕Si| 

> k=1

log pθ

 (Ti ⊕ Si)k | (Ti ⊕ Si)<k , P i

; // NLL loss 

gfull = ∇θ Lfull ; // compute gradient 

Step 2: Gradient Decoupling 

▷ Compute the reference gradient ( w.r.t. problem-specific information): 

Lref = − 1

> B

PB

> i=1

P|Si| 

> k=1

log pθ

 Ski | S<k i , P i

; // NLL loss with Si as target 

gref = ∇θ Lref ; // compute gradient 

▷ Decouple the content-relevant gradient ( w.r.t. problem-specific information) from gfull :

gcon = ⟨gfull ,gref ⟩∥gref ∥2 · gref ; // projection 

▷ Decouple the paradigm-relevant gradient ( w.r.t. LongCoT reasoning paradigm) from gfull :

gpar = gfull − gcon ; // orthogonalization 

Step 3: Update Model Parameters 

θ ← θ − η · gpar ; // use decoupled paradigm-relevant gradient to update model 

return θ;

loss function Lfull for this mini-batch is defined as: 

gfull = ∇θ Lfull , where Lfull = − 1

B

> B

X

> i=1
> |Ti⊕Si|

X

> k=1

log pθ



(Ti ⊕ Si)k (Ti ⊕ Si)<k , P i



, (1) where the gradient contains two intertwined types of supervisory information. First, there is problem-specific content, which includes the facts, formulas, or procedures needed for a particular problem. Focusing too much on this during training can cause the model to memorize details, limiting its ability to develop generalizable reasoning skills. Second, there is information aimed at activating the model’s LongCoT abilities. This involves guiding the model to generate and follow logical steps to reach a solution, rather than just memorizing input-output pairs. This approach is crucial for enabling the model to generalize beyond specific training examples and apply learned reasoning patterns to new and unseen problems. 

Step 2: Gradient Decoupling via Projection and Orthogonalization 

In this step, we decouple the full response gradient gfull defined by Eq. (1) into the paradigm-relevant gradient and the content-relevant gradient . The former contains supervisory information for long reasoning abilities that is beneficial for generalization, while the latter contains problem-specific supervisory information. 

Compute the reference gradient. To isolate the content-specific gradient from gfull , we first compute a reference gradient that captures only the problem-specific content. For each training example (Pi, T i, S i), we evaluate the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss solely over the solution component Si, defined as follows: 

gref = ∇θ Lref , where Lref = − 1

B

> B

X

> i=1
> |Si|

X

> k=1

log pθ



Ski S<k i , P i



. (2) This gradient, gref , signifies how the model would adjust its parameters if it were trained to directly produce the final deterministic solution Si, without undergoing an extensive exploratory reasoning phase before generating the answer. Consequently, gref serves as a reference gradient for problem-specific reasoning content, as the NLL loss target Si encompasses only the knowledge and heuristics pertinent to the problem, devoid of any LongCoT reasoning framework. 6Decouple the content-relevant gradient via projection. Using the reference gradient gref , which focuses on problem-specific reasoning, we can extract the content-relevant component from the full gradient gfull through a straightforward projection operation. The projection is defined as follows: 

gcon = ⟨gfull , gref ⟩∥gref ∥2 · gref , (3) where ⟨· , ·⟩ denotes the inner product and ∥ · ∥ 2 represents the ℓ2 norm. Conceptually, gref defines the subspace that captures the influence of problem-specific content on model updates. By projecting gfull 

onto gref , we isolate the component of gfull that pertains exclusively to problem-specific reasoning. This results in gcon , which represents the content-relevant gradient component. 

Figure 2: Relationships be-tween the involved gradients in DLoFT. 

Decouple the paradigm-relevant gradient via orthogonalization. 

After isolating the content-relevant gradient gcon , we extract the paradigm-relevant component by removing the influence of problem-specific reasoning from the full gradient gfull . This is accomplished through an orthogonalization operation defined as: 

gpar = gfull − gcon . (4) By subtracting gcon from gfull , we eliminate the component associated with problem-specific reasoning, resulting in a purified gradient gpar 

that is orthogonal to gcon . This ensures that gpar captures aspects of gfull 

that are independent of problem-specific knowledge. Consequently, 

gpar represents the paradigm-relevant gradient, focused solely on the LongCoT reasoning paradigm. It indicates how the model should adjust its parameters to enhance its LongCoT reasoning abilities, irrespective of the specific problems present in the training data. Figure 2 illustrates the relationships between these gradients. 

Step 3: Update the Model with Paradigm-Relevant Gradient 

To avoid the model overfitting to the problem-specific knowledge involved in training data, we drop the content-relevant gradient gcon and update the model using only the paradigm-relevant gradient 

gpar :

θ ← θ − η · gpar , (5) where η is the learning rate. This gradient decoupling mechanism ensures that the model concentrately internalizes generalizable LongCoT reasoning abilities rather than memorizing problem-specific information in training data. 

# 5 Experiments 

In this section, we first introduce the experimental setups in Sec. 5.1. Then, in Sec. 5.2, we demonstrate the superiority of our DLoFT algorithm over supervised fine-tuning (SFT), both as a standalone supervised learning stage and as a cold-start stage prior to reinforcement learning (RL). Ablation studies on our key designs and further discussions are detailed in Appendix A. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Models. To evaluate the effectiveness and generality of our DLoFT algorithm, we conduct ex-periments on both generalist and domain-specific LLMs with varying sizes. For generalist LLMs, we adopt the Qwen2.5-Instruct series [ 11 ] at 7B and 32B scales due to their strong performance across a variety of tasks. For domain-specific LLMs, we consider three major domains: math, code, and medicine. Concretely, we use Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct [ 30 ] for mathematical reasoning, Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct [31] for code generation, and Meditron-7B [32] for medical reasoning. 

Evaluation. To investigate the comprehensive generalization, we conduct evaluation on a variety of benchmarks across 20 domains. For major domains with many well-known benchmarks, we test on the most commonly-used and challenging ones, such as the competition-level AIME24 [ 4], MATH-500 [ 33 ] and OlympiadBench [ 34 ] for mathematics, LiveCodeBench (v2) [ 6] for code generation, and MedQA [ 13 ] for medical reasoning. For other less-studied domains with few 7well-established benchmarks, we directly use the corresponding subset from SuperGPQA [ 35 ], a benchmark focused on graduate-level reasoning problems, as our test set. These domains cover STEM disciplines, social sciences, and humanities, including physics, chemistry, biology, computer, mechanical, electronic, communication, astronomy, geography, civil, agriculture, economics, history, law, literature, philosophy, and sociology. 

Training Datasets. Our experiments utilize two types of LongCoT datasets that differ in coverage: • Mixed-Domains Dataset . We adopt the well-known s1K [ 7 ] dataset due to its good trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency. It contains one thousand high-quality data covering mathe-matics, programming, science, and puzzles, and is carefully curated based on quality, difficulty, and diversity simultaneously. Each data has a LongCoT response generated by Google Gemini Flash Thinking model [36]. • Single-Domain Dataset . We use open-source datasets that focus on three major domains: math, code, and medicine. Specifically, we take the OpenR1-Math-220K dataset [ 12 ] for mathematics, the programming-related subset from OpenThoughts-114K dataset [ 37 ] for code, and the Medical-o1 dataset [ 38 ] for medicine. Prior studies [ 39 , 7] have revealed that learning LongCoT reasoning capabilities does not require hundreds of thousands of data, because it focuses on changing the reasoning paradigm rather than memorizing a large amount of knowledge. Therefore, we randomly sample 5K data from each of the above three datasets for our training, denoted as OpenR1-Math-5K, OpenThoughts-Code-5K, and Medical-o1-5K, respectively. 

Training Settings. For fair comparison, we use the same training settings for SFT and our DLoFT. The models are trained for 10 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with weight decay of zero. The learning rate is first increased from 0 to 1e-5 with a warm-up ratio of 0.03, and then decreased following a cosine decay schedule. We set the batch size as 16 when training on s1K [ 7] dataset, and 64 for other training datasets. During the RL training stage, we use the recent popular GRPO algorithm [ 40 ] with a KL penalty coefficient of 0.001. The batch size is set to 128, and the learning rate is set to 1e-6 keeping constant throughout the training. We train the model for 3 epochs, because it is found that the reward curve converges after about 3 epochs. 

5.2 Main Results 5.2.1 DLoFT Generalizes Better than SFT in all Evaluation Settings Results on Generalist LLMs. Figure 3 compares our DLoFT with SFT on two generalist LLMs (Qwen2.5-7B/32B-Instruct). We evaluate across 17 diverse domains and report the relative accuracy compared to the baseline model to intuitively illustrate the gain and degradation in performance after training. It can be observed that SFT suffers from clear overfitting to training topics, leading to notable performance drops on out-of-distribution domains. For instance, SFT causes a degradation of -16.0 points on “communication” for 7B model. In stark contrast, our DLoFT consistently improves performance across both in-domain and out-of-domain benchmarks, demonstrating a clear advantage in generalization ability. For example, compared with SFT, our DLoFT exhibits an advantage of +12.4 and 16.4 points on 7B and 32B models. This shows that our method not only mitigates overfitting but also promotes the transferability of LongCoT reasoning ability across various domains. Notably, DLoFT still outperforms SFT even on in-domain benchmarks, yielding additional +8.9 and +11.5 accuracy gains for 7B and 32B models, respectively. This reveals that the gain brought by SFT is still limited due to overfitting to narrow problem-specific content in the training set with narrow topics, which hinders its capacity to generalize even within the same domain. Averaged over all 17 domains, our DLoFT achieves a substantial improvement of +9.8 for Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, while SFT leads to a degradation of -1.8. In summary, these results indicate that our DLoFT enables generalist LLMs to efficiently acquire generalizable LongCoT capabilities using only a small amount of representative data, without the necessity to construct a large-scale dataset that exhaustively covers a wide range of topics. This not only significantly reduces the cost of data collection, curation, and annotation, but also greatly saves the required training time and computational resources. 

Results on Domain-specific LLMs. DLoFT’s strong generalization can also be observed in the case of domain-specific LLMs. Figure 4 compares our DLoFT and SFT on three excellent domain-specific LLMs trained with either in-domain or out-domain LongCoT data. Results show that our DLoFT consistently outperforms SFT across all evaluation settings, regardless of whether the training data is in-domain or out-domain. In particular, when models are trained on out-domain LongCoT data, 8Figure 3: Comparison between SFT and our DLoFT on two generalist LLMs trained on s1K dataset [ 7] and evaluated on 17 domains. The last three columns with green edges show the average gain on these domains for all benchmarks, in-domain benchmarks, and out-domain ones, respectively. To intuitively observe which domains experienced performance degradation after training, we only report the relative performance (pass@1 accuracy) compared to the baseline model. It can be found that SFT leads to significant performance degradation on out-of-distribution domains, while our DLoFT boosts the performance of baseline model on both in-domain and out-domain benchmarks. SFT hurts the performance by -3.3, -1.6, and -7.5 points for these three baseline models in math, code, and medicine domains, respectively. In contrast, our DLoFT achieves substantial improvements accordingly: +10.0 on AIME24 (math), +1.8 on LiveCodeBench (code), and +9.1 on MedQA (medical). Interestingly, our DLoFT shows comparable performance when training on in-domain or out-domain data, which indicates that our DLoFT algorithm effectively isolates the influence related to LongCoT reasoning paradigm from the training data, while being robust to domain-specific information that may otherwise act as confounding noise. Moreover, even when in-domain LongCoT data is available, our DLoFT still provides moderate improvements over SFT. We attribute this to SFT’s tendency to focus on domain- and problem-specific knowledge or skills present in the training data, thereby limiting its capacity to learn general reasoning ability. In contrast, by decoupling domain-specific signals from reasoning ability signals, our DLoFT concentrates on learning general reasoning ability, leading to more robust gains on in-domain benchmarks as well. In summary, these results demonstrate that our DLoFT offers an efficient and practical way for enabling LongCoT reasoning in domain-specific LLMs. With DLoFT, a domain LLM can activate its LongCoT capability by leveraging publicly available LongCoT data from other domains, freed from constructing its own in-domain LongCoT datasets costly. This not only reduces the expense of data annotation and training, but also provides a fundamentally viable solution for domains with privacy constraints (data cannot be annotated through public APIs) or domains whose data is intrinsically difficult to collect. 

5.2.2 DLoFT is a More Effective LongCoT Cold-Start for Reinforcement Learning (RL) 

We highlight two key benefits when using our DLoFT as a cold-start training algorithm before RL: 

Relax the Dependence on In-domain Data in Cold-Start. It can be observed from Figure 4 that SFT cold-start relies heavily on in-domain LongCoT data. The performance degrades consistently when performing SFT cold-start on out-domain LongCoT data. RL may not always be able to completely recover the performance loss caused by the SFT cold-start, so that the final performance after RL may be worse than the baseline. For example, as Figure 4c, SFT+RL still falls behind the baseline model by 4.9 points. In contrast, DLoFT frees the cold-start from the indispensability for in-domain 9Figure 4: Compare SFT with our DLoFT on three domain-specific LLMs. Models are trained on out-domain and in-domain LongCoT data, respectively. In contrast to the degraded performance after SFT on out-domain LongCoT data, our DLoFT shows much better generalization and further promotes the subsequent reinforcement learning (RL). LongCoT data. Results show that our DLoFT cold-start, using publicly available LongCoT data from other domains, can achieve performance comparable to that obtained with an equal amount of in-domain data. Such strong generalization and robustness bring great convenience for the data collection and curation in the cold-start stage. 

Amplify the Outcome of RL. Even with access to in-domain LongCoT cold-start data, our DLoFT offers a stronger foundation for subsequent RL, boosting RL to achieve higher gains. For example, as Figure 4c, RL after SFT cold-start brings a +3.7 gain, while RL after DLoFT cold-start achieves a larger +5.0 improvement. One reasonable explanation is that SFT cold-start, even when performed on in-domain data, may still introduce slight overfitting to domain-specific information, which provides a suboptimal foundation for the subsequent RL stage and increases the burden for further improvement. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We introduced Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT), an algorithm designed to endow LLMs with generalizable LongCoT reasoning abilities while mitigating overfitting to problem-specific information. By decoupling gradients into paradigm-relevant and content-relevant components using the intrinsic two-phase structure of LongCoT responses, DLoFT updates the model solely with the reasoning-relevant signal. Our approach preserves in-distribution performance and yields substantial gains in out-of-distribution generalization, offering a robust and efficient path toward scalable and efficient LongCoT activation across diverse tasks and domains. We compare our DLoFT with SFT on the challenging benchmarks in 17 diverse domains for both generalist and domain-specific LLMs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that: (1) our DLoFT effectively avoids the overfitting problem in SFT and learns stronger generalizable LongCoT reasoning ability. (2) As a cold-start stage prior to RL, our DLoFT can free the cold-start from the dependence on in-domain LongCoT data, and serves as a stronger foundation for subsequent RL, amplifying the gain of RL. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by the Research Grants Council under the Areas of Excellence scheme grant AoE/E-601/22-R, Hong Kong Research Grant Council - Early Career Scheme (Grant No. 27209621), General Research Fund Scheme (Grant No. 17202422, 17212923, 17215025), Theme-based Research (Grant No. T45-701/22-R) and Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Commission (SGDX20220530111405040). Part of the described research work is conducted in the JC STEM Lab of Robotics for Soft Materials funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. 10 References 

[1] OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms, 2024. [2] OpenAI. Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini, 2025. [3] OpenAI. Openai o3-mini, 2025. [4] AIME. American invitational mathematics examination, 2024. [5] David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. [6] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024. [7] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19393, 2025. [8] Yingqian Min, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Jie Chen, Jia Deng, Yiwen Hu, Yiru Tang, Jiapeng Wang, Xiaoxue Cheng, Huatong Song, et al. Imitate, explore, and self-improve: A reproduction report on slow-thinking reasoning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09413, 2024. [9] Bespoke Labs. Bespoke-stratos: The unreasonable effectiveness of reasoning distillation, 2025. [10] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025. [11] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024. [12] Open-R1 Team. Openr1-math-220k, 2025. [13] Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021. [14] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022. [15] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. [16] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. [17] OpenAI. Gpt-4o, 2024. [18] Darsh J Shah, Peter Rushton, Somanshu Singla, Mohit Parmar, Kurt Smith, Yash Vanjani, Ashish Vaswani, Adarsh Chaluvaraju, Andrew Hojel, Andrew Ma, et al. Rethinking reflection in pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04022, 2025. [19] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015. [20] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https://github. com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca , 2023. [21] Qwen Team. Qwq: Reflect deeply on the boundaries of the unknown, 2024. [22] Qwen Team. Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learning, 2025. 

11 [23] Yu Zhao, Huifeng Yin, Bo Zeng, Hao Wang, Tianqi Shi, Chenyang Lyu, Longyue Wang, Weihua Luo, and Kaifu Zhang. Marco-o1: Towards open reasoning models for open-ended solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14405, 2024. [24] Yiwei Qin, Xuefeng Li, Haoyang Zou, Yixiu Liu, Shijie Xia, Zhen Huang, Yixin Ye, Weizhe Yuan, Hector Liu, Yuanzhi Li, et al. O1 replication journey: A strategic progress report–part 1. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18982, 2024. [25] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024. [26] Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, Qi Han, Daxin Jiang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Open-reasoner-zero: An open source approach to scaling up reinforcement learning on the base model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24290, 2025. [27] Weihao Zeng, Yuzhen Huang, Qian Liu, Wei Liu, Keqing He, Zejun Ma, and Junxian He. Simplerl-zoo: Investigating and taming zero reinforcement learning for open base models in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18892, 2025. [28] Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin. Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783, 2025. [29] Edward Yeo, Yuxuan Tong, Morry Niu, Graham Neubig, and Xiang Yue. Demystifying long chain-of-thought reasoning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03373, 2025. [30] An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng Liu, Jianhong Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2. 5-math technical report: Toward mathematical expert model via self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12122, 2024. [31] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186, 2024. [32] Zeming Chen, Alejandro Hernández Cano, Angelika Romanou, Antoine Bonnet, Kyle Matoba, Francesco Salvi, Matteo Pagliardini, Simin Fan, Andreas Köpf, Amirkeivan Mohtashami, et al. Meditron-70b: Scaling medical pretraining for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16079, 2023. [33] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021. [34] Chaoqun He, Renjie Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Shengding Hu, Zhen Leng Thai, Junhao Shen, Jinyi Hu, Xu Han, Yujie Huang, Yuxiang Zhang, et al. Olympiadbench: A challenging benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14008, 2024. [35] Xinrun Du, Yifan Yao, Kaijing Ma, Bingli Wang, Tianyu Zheng, King Zhu, Minghao Liu, Yiming Liang, Xiaolong Jin, Zhenlin Wei, et al. Supergpqa: Scaling llm evaluation across 285 graduate disciplines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14739, 2025. [36] Google DeepMind. Gemini 2.5 flash, 2025. [37] OpenThoughts Team. Open Thoughts. https://open-thoughts.ai, January 2025. [38] Junying Chen, Zhenyang Cai, Ke Ji, Xidong Wang, Wanlong Liu, Rongsheng Wang, Jianye Hou, and Benyou Wang. Huatuogpt-o1, towards medical complex reasoning with llms, 2024. [39] Yixin Ye, Zhen Huang, Yang Xiao, Ethan Chern, Shijie Xia, and Pengfei Liu. Limo: Less is more for reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03387, 2025. [40] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024. [41] Sitong Wu, Haoru Tan, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Xiaojuan Qi, and Jiaya Jia. Saco loss: Sample-wise affinity consistency for vision-language pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 27358–27369, 2024. [42] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022. 

12 [43] Jingyao Li, Senqiao Yang, Sitong Wu, Han Shi, Chuanyang Zheng, Hong Xu, and Jiaya Jia. Logits-based finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24461, 2025. [44] Zhisheng Zhong, Chengyao Wang, Yuqi Liu, Senqiao Yang, Longxiang Tang, Yuechen Zhang, Jingyao Li, Tianyuan Qu, Yanwei Li, Yukang Chen, et al. Lyra: An efficient and speech-centric framework for omni-cognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3694–3704, 2025. [45] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Xiuzhe Wu, Wang Wang, Bo Zhao, Zeke Xie, Gui-Song Xia, and Xiaojuan Qi. Understanding data influence with differential approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14648, 2025. [46] Xiaowei Hu, Min Shi, Weiyun Wang, Sitong Wu, Linjie Xing, Wenhai Wang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Jie Zhou, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Demystify transformers & convolutions in modern image deep networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024. [47] Sitong Wu, Tianyi Wu, Haoru Tan, and Guodong Guo. Pale transformer: A general vision transformer backbone with pale-shaped attention. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 36, pages 2731–2739, 2022. [48] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. [49] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. [50] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, and Jimin Pi. Semantic diffusion network for semantic segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8702–8716, 2022. [51] Fangjian Lin, Zhanhao Liang, Sitong Wu, Junjun He, Kai Chen, and Shengwei Tian. Structtoken: Rethinking semantic segmentation with structural prior. IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology, 33(10):5655–5663, 2023. [52] Sitong Wu, Tianyi Wu, Fangjian Lin, Shengwei Tian, and Guodong Guo. Fully transformer networks for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04108, 2021. [53] Shan Zhang, Tianyi Wu, Sitong Wu, and Guodong Guo. Catrans: Context and affinity transformer for few-shot segmentation, 2022. [54] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. [55] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Wei Huang, Shizhen Zhao, and XIAOJUAN QI. Data pruning by information maximization. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. [56] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016. [57] Jingyao Li, Pengguang Chen, Bin Xia, Hong Xu, and Jiaya Jia. Motcoder: Elevating large language models with modular of thought for challenging programming tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15960, 2023. [58] Fangjian Lin, Tianyi Wu, Sitong Wu, Shengwei Tian, and Guodong Guo. Feature selective transformer for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14124, 2022. [59] Jingyao Li, Pengguang Chen, Sitong Wu, Chuanyang Zheng, Hong Xu, and Jiaya Jia. Robocoder: Robotic learning from basic skills to general tasks with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03757, 2024. [60] Qiang Zhou, Chaohui Yu, Shaofeng Zhang, Sitong Wu, Zhibing Wang, and Fan Wang. Regionblip: A unified multi-modal pre-training framework for holistic and regional comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02299, 2023. [61] Xichen Zhang, Sitong Wu, Yinghao Zhu, Haoru Tan, Shaozuo Yu, Ziyi He, and Jiaya Jia. Scaf-grpo: Scaffolded group relative policy optimization for enhancing llm reasoning, 2025. 

13 [62] Xichen Zhang, Sitong Wu, Haoru Tan, Shaozuo Yu, Yinghao Zhu, Ziyi He, and Jiaya Jia. Smartswitch: Advancing llm reasoning by overcoming underthinking via promoting deeper thought exploration, 2025. [63] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Fei Du, Yukang Chen, Zhibin Wang, Fan Wang, and Xiaojuan Qi. Data pruning via moving-one-sample-out. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:18251–18262, 2023. [64] Shaofeng Zhang, Qiang Zhou, Sitong Wu, Haoru Tan, Zhibin Wang, Jinfa Huang, and Junchi Yan. Cr2pq: Continuous relative rotary positional query for dense visual representation learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. [65] Sitong Wu, Haoru Tan, Yukang Chen, Shaofeng Zhang, Jingyao Li, Bei Yu, Xiaojuan Qi, and Jiaya Jia. Mixture-of-scores: Robust image-text data valuation via three lines of code. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 24603–24614, 2025. [66] Fangjian Lin, Sitong Wu, Yizhe Ma, and Shengwei Tian. Full-scale selective transformer for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2663–2679, 2022. [67] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 16000–16009, 2022. [68] Jingyao Li, Han Shi, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, Hong Xu, and Jiaya Jia. Quickllama: Query-aware inference acceleration for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07528, 2024. [69] Haoru Tan, Chuang Wang, Sitong Wu, Xu-Yao Zhang, Fei Yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Ensemble quadratic assignment network for graph matching. International Journal of Computer Vision, 132(9):3633–3655, 2024. [70] Yizhe Ma, Fangjian Lin, Sitong Wu, Shengwei Tian, and Long Yu. Prseg: A lightweight patch rotate mlp decoder for semantic segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 33(11):6860–6871, 2023. [71] Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023. [72] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023. [73] Fangjian Lin, Yizhe Ma, Sitong Wu, Long Yu, and Shengwei Tian. Axwin transformer: A context-aware vision transformer backbone with axial windows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01280, 2023. [74] Jingyao Li, Hao Sun, Zile Qiao, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Hong Xu, and Jiaya Jia. Dynam-icbench: Evaluating real-time report generation in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21343, 2025. [75] Hao-Ru Tan, Chuang Wang, Si-Tong Wu, Tie-Qiang Wang, Xu-Yao Zhang, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Proxy graph matching with proximal matching networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pages 9808–9815, 2021. [76] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022. [77] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(70):1–53, 2024. [78] Fangjian Lin, Jianlong Yuan, Sitong Wu, Fan Wang, and Zhibin Wang. Uninext: Exploring a unified archi-tecture for vision recognition. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pages 3200–3208, 2023. [79] Shizhen Zhao, Jiahui Liu, Xin Wen, Haoru Tan, and Xiaojuan Qi. Equipping vision foundation model with mixture of experts for out-of-distribution detection, 2025. [80] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023. 

14 A Ablation and Further Study 

A.1 Effect of Projection Operation in Eq. (3) As mentioned in Sec. 4.3 in the main paper, our DLoFT first derive a reference gradient gref that captures only the problem-specific information, and then use a projection operation to isolate the component of the full gradient gfull that aligns with gref , resulting in the content-relevant gradient gcon 

(as defined in Eq. (3) in the main paper). Here, we ablate the effect of this projection operation by comparing the following two settings: (1) using the projection as Eq. (3) , that is, gcon = ⟨gfull ,gref ⟩∥gref ∥2 ·gref ;(2) skipping the projection and directly assigning gcon = gref . As shown in Table 1, omitting the projection still achieves better performance than standard supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and partially mitigates the out-of-domain performance drop. However, the variant without projection consistently underperforms the full DLoFT algorithm with the projection operation. This result indicates that the projection step plays a critical role in more precisely isolating problem-specific gradients, and its removal leads to incomplete decoupling, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the filtering problem-specific knowledge and heuristics. Table 1: Ablation on the effect of projection operation in Eq. (3) in the main paper. The first line corresponds to the model before training. We train the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 11 ] model on s1K [ 7 ]dataset and report the pass@1 accuracy average on four in-domain benchmarks and 16 out-domain benchmarks, respectively.                

> Method Projection In-domain Out-domain Acc@1 (avg) Acc@1 (avg) --21.5 31.2 SFT -27.8 27.3 DLoFT ✘30.3 31.8
> ✔36.7 39.7

A.2 Effectiveness of Our Gradient Decoupling Mechanism 

The gradient decoupling mechanism in our DLoFT aims to decouple the full gradient into two orthogonal components: (1) the paradigm-relevant gradient gpar exclusively capturing the general LongCoT reasoning paradigm; (2) the content-relevant gradient gcon corresponding to the problem-specific knowledge and heuristics. In order to verify the effectiveness of our decoupling mechanism, we conduct a comparative study between updating the model using only the content-relevant gradient 

gcon versus only the paradigm-relevant gradient gpar . The underlying intuition is that if the decoupling mechanism is effective, then gcon should not contain any signal related to the LongCoT paradigm. As a result, updating the model using only gcon should not lead to any emergence of LongCoT-style behavior. To test this, we train two separate models: one using gpar and one using gcon , with all other settings held constant. We then measure the percentage of generated responses that exhibit LongCoT behavior on both in-domain and out-of-domain benchmarks. As shown in Table 2, the model updated with gpar demonstrates clear learning of LongCoT behavior and achieves strong generalization, while the model trained with gcon fails to produce any LongCoT-style reasoning and performs close to the baseline. This sharp contrast provides strong empirical evidence that our decoupling effectively isolates the paradigm-relevant gradient, confirming both the functional accuracy and practical value of our DLoFT approach. 

A.3 Effect of Weight Decay Regularization 

A natural method for preventing overfitting is the use of weight decay, a widely adopted regularization technique in model training. However, we find that weight decay is largely ineffective in preventing the type of overfitting observed in LongCoT supervised fine-tuning. Specifically, as shown in Table 3, although applying weight decay can reduce the model’s tendency to memorize problem-specific details, it does not improve generalization to out-of-distribution problems. This is because weight decay regularizes model parameters globally without distinguishing between gradients that encode 15 Table 2: Analysis on the effectiveness of our gradient decoupling mechanism. The first line corresponds to the model before training. We train the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 11 ] model on s1K [ 7 ]dataset and evaluate on four in-domain benchmarks and 16 out-domain benchmarks, respectively. The LongCoT Response percentage is calculated on all in-domain and out-domain test data.                     

> Method Gradient to Update Model Parameters In-domain Out-domain LongCoT Response Acc@1 (avg) Acc@1 (avg) Percentage --21.5 31.2 0% SFT -27.8 27.3 94% DLoFT gcon 19.1 20.5 0%
> gpar 36.7 39.7 100%

Table 3: Analysis on the effect of weight decay regularization. The first line corresponds to the model before training. We train the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 11 ] model on s1K [ 7] dataset and report the pass@1 accuracy average on four in-domain benchmarks and 16 out-domain benchmarks, respectively.                  

> Method Weight Decay In-domain Out-domain Acc@1 (avg) Acc@1 (avg) --21.5 31.2 SFT ✘27.8 27.3
> ✔26.2 27.4 DLoFT ✘36.7 39.7
> ✔36.0 39.5

Table 4: Efficiency analysis. The experiments are conducted on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 11 ] model with s1K [ 7 ] dataset. We report the average running time of each training step and the average GPU memory cost throughout the training.       

> Method Running Time (minutes) GPU Memory (MB) SFT 6.2 69986 DLoFT 6.8 70684

general reasoning patterns and those that reflect problem-specific knowledge. As a result, the model may still internalize partial problem-specific information tied to the training data. Our findings highlight the need for more targeted training algorithms, such as our proposed DLoFT, which explicitly filters out problem-specific knowledge signals while preserving the generalizable reasoning paradigm. 

A.4 Efficiency 

Compared to standard SFT, our DLoFT algorithm introduces an additional step in each training iteration, that is, the gradient decoupling step (Step 2 in Algorithm 1, where we compute a reference gradient and decouple the full gradient into the content-relevant and paradigm-relevant components via projection and orthogonalization operation. To assess the efficiency impact of this additional step, we compare our DLoFT with SFT in terms of both training speed and GPU memory cost. As shown in Table 4, our DLoFT introduces only a minor overhead in running time per training step. This is primarily because the projection and orthogonalization operations in Step 2 are lightweight vector computations that require negligible additional compute compared to the forward and backward passes of large LLMs. Besides, the computational cost for the reference gradient gref is also much less than that of the full gradient gfull in Step 1, because the solution Si is generally much shorter than the thinking process Ti. Moreover, GPU memory usage remains comparable to that of SFT. Since DLoFT reuses existing gradients and performs additional operations in-place without requiring the 16 storage of large intermediate activations or duplicated models, its memory footprint remains efficient and scalable. In summary, DLoFT offers significantly improved generalization and robustness with minimal computational overhead, making it a practical replacement for SFT in real-world training scenarios. 

# B LongCoT Reasoning 

Long Chain-of-Thought (LongCoT) is an emerging reasoning paradigm that gained traction following the breakthrough of OpenAI o1 [ 1] model, which demonstrated impressive capabilities in complex reasoning tasks. Inspired by the slow thinking mechanism in humans, LongCoT encourages models to conduct a thorough thinking phase before concluding a deterministic solution. Figure 5 illustrates an example of the LongCoT reasoning paradigm. Specifically, a LongCoT-style response consists of two sequential phases: • A systematic thinking phase, where the model analyzes the problem, summarizes relevant facts, explores alternative ideas, reflects on its reasoning, and corrects potential mistakes. • A deterministic solution phase, where a deterministic, step-by-step answer is provided based on the reasoning developed in the thinking phase. 

# C Limitations 

The high-performance, high-generalization optimization algorithm proposed in this paper for Long-CoT supervised finetuning demonstrates excellent performance across various scenarios and tasks. However, we believe that the experimental scale validated here is still limited. Real-world applications often involve much larger datasets and models (on the order of hundreds of billions). Due to limited computational resources during this work, we were unable to conduct large-scale experiments. In the future, we plan to secure additional resources to validate performance on a larger scale. 

# D Impact Statement 

The high-performance fine-tuning algorithm designed in this paper has many positive implications, such as enhancing the inference capabilities of existing models, allowing them to better serve a wider range of people and industries, particularly with lower data collection costs. However, there are concerns about negative impacts; for instance, this method could potentially be misused by illegal entities to train models for inhumane surveillance and authoritarian control, which legislative bodies worldwide should take seriously. 17 Figure 5: Illustration of the Long Chain-of-Thought (LongCoT) style response. The problem is sampled from AIME24 [4] benchmark, and the response is generated by QwQ-32B model [22]. 18 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the abstract and introduction section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the relevant section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 19 Justification: Please see the supplemental material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the experimental section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 20 Answer: [Yes] Justification: The code and data will be made publicly available upon acceptance through peer review. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the experimental section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the experimental section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). 21 • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please see the experimental section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: We strictly follow the relevant Guidelines. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please check the relevant section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. 22 • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The training algorithm involved in this article will not cause the originally safe model to become dangerous. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not use existing assets Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. 23 • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

24 Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: This article only uses LLM to help check for spelling mistakes in very small quantities. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 25