Title: SYMDIREC: A Neuro-Symbolic Divide-Retrieve-Conquer Framework for Enhanced RTL Synthesis and Summarization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.17208v1

Published Time: Thu, 19 Mar 2026 00:28:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# SYM DIREC: A Neuro-Symbolic Divide-Retrieve-Conquer Framework for Enhanced RTL Synthesis and Summarization 

Prashanth Vijayaraghavan, Apoorva Nitsure, Luyao Shi, Charles Mackin, Ashutosh Jadhav , David Beymer , Ehsan Degan , Vandana Mukherjee 

IBM Research, San Jose, CA, USA 

{prashanthv,apoorva.nitsure,luyao.shi,charles.mackin}@ibm.com {ashutosh,beymer,edehgha,vandana}@us.ibm.com 

Abstract 

Register-Transfer Level (RTL) synthesis and summarization are central to hardware de-sign automation but remain challenging for Large Language Models (LLMs) due to rigid HDL syntax, limited supervision, and weak alignment with natural language. Existing prompting and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) methods have not incorporated sym-bolic planning, limiting their structural preci-sion. We introduce SYM DIREC1, a neuro-symbolic framework that decomposes RTL tasks into symbolic subgoals, retrieves rele-vant code via a fine-tuned retriever, and assem-bles verified outputs through LLM reasoning. Supporting both Verilog and VHDL without LLM fine-tuning, S YM DIREC achieves ∼20% higher Pass@1 rates for synthesis and 15–20% ROUGE -L improvements for summarization over prompting and RAG baselines, demon-strating the benefits of symbolic guidance in RTL tasks. 

1 Introduction 

Register-Transfer Level (RTL) synthesis and sum-marization are central tasks in Electronic Design Automation (EDA). RTL synthesis translates high-level natural language specifications into synthesiz-able hardware modules, while RTL summarization produces concise natural language explanations of existing hardware code. For example, given the natural language (NL) specification “build an 8-bit ripple-carry adder” a system must generate a correct Verilog/VHDL module that composes full-adders and propagates carries; conversely, given such a module, it should explain its functional struc-ture (e.g., LSB/MSB adders and carry logic). While this example is relatively simple, real-world RTL designs often involve multi-stage pipelines, control logic, and hierarchical modules with complex tim-ing and data dependencies. These characteristics 

> 1

Short for Neuro-Sym bolic Di vide– Re trieve– Conquer Strategy Prompt       

> NL Spec (for RTL Synthesis) or
> RTL (for RTL Summarization)
> Sub -Component
> X1
> Sub -Component
> X2
> Sub -Component
> XN
> KDB
> Symbolic Divide
> Symbolic
> Retrieve
> Conquer
> LLM -Guided Verification
> and Assembly
> Response
> Verilog/VHDL Code or
> NL Summary
> Relevant Context Relevant Context Relevant Context
> Example Prompt:
> NL Spec: Build an 8-
> bit ripple -carry adder
> Example Response:
> module adder8(...);
> assign sum = a + b;
> endmodule
> LSB Adder MSB Adder Carry Logic

Figure 1: Overview of our S YM DIREC framework for RTL synthesis and summarization. 

make monolithic generation brittle and error-prone, motivating the need for modular decomposition, targeted retrieval of reusable RTL components, and explicit integration and verification. As illustrated in Figure 1, both synthesis and summarization re-quire preserving strict HDL syntax, modular struc-ture, and precise functional semantics, distinguish-ing them from general-purpose code generation and summarization. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown increasing promise in code generation, their performance on Hardware Description Languages (HDLs) like Verilog and VHDL remains limited due to rigid syntax, sparse annotated data, and semantic divergence from natural language (Vija-yaraghavan et al., 2024b; Zhao et al., 2025). Recent prompting strategies such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), CoDes (Vijayaragha-van et al., 2024a), and ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) enhance step-by-step reasoning yet struggle with RTL-specific tasks due to domain mismatch and absence of structural priors. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) methods (Lewis et al., 2020; Petroni et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2025; Ping et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024) reduce hallucinations and 

> arXiv:2603.17208v1 [cs.CL] 17 Mar 2026

improve factuality by grounding LLMs with exter-nal context. However, they often rely on expen-sive instruction-tuning, target only Verilog, and ad-dress either synthesis or summarization in isolation. Moreover, neither prompting nor RAG pipelines typically incorporate symbolic scaffolds, which can explicitly capture hardware intent. Symbolic planning and neuro-symbolic ap-proaches have demonstrated strong benefits in en-hancing interpretability and structure-awareness in generation tasks (Zhou et al., 2022; Pan et al.). Models like Logic-LM (Pan et al.) and Code-as-Symbolic-Planner (Chen et al., 2025) lever-age symbolic scaffolding to guide generation, but these techniques have not been extended to RTL workflows. We introduce SYM DIREC, a neuro-symbolic Divide–Retrieve–Conquer framework tai-lored for RTL synthesis and summarization across both Verilog and VHDL. S YM DIREC consists of three symbolic reasoning-driven stages: (a) Di-vide via symbolic decomposition, where an LLM breaks a high-level RTL task into modular sub-components with natural language and symbolic representations (e.g., Boolean or dataflow logic); (b) Retrieve using a domain-adapted symbolic re-triever fine-tuned on the RTL-IR dataset, which incorporates both symbolic and textual cues to fetch semantically relevant RTL fragments; and (c) 

Conquer via LLM-guided verification and assem-bly, where retrieved candidates are aligned with symbolic intent and assembled into a final code block or summary. By integrating symbolic logic into every stage, S YM DIREC improves retrieval precision, output consistency, and verification; all without requiring full LLM fine-tuning. Empiri-cal results demonstrate that S YM DIREC achieves roughly 20% higher Pass@1 accuracy in synthesis and 15–20% improvement in R OUGE -L for sum-marization over strong RAG and prompting base-lines. These results highlight the value of symbolic reasoning in bridging the gap between natural lan-guage, logic, and RTL semantics. Our key contri-butions are as follows: 

SYM DIREC Framework: We propose a novel neuro-symbolic Divide–Retrieve–Conquer pipeline for RTL tasks, integrating symbolic decomposition, retrieval, and verification in a unified architecture. 

Symbolic Guidance for Retrieval and Verifica-tion: We show that symbolic logic enables more precise retrieval and structurally consistent outputs, outperforming natural language methods. 

Cross-Language RTL Evaluation: We evaluate SYM DIREC on both Verilog and VHDL bench-marks for synthesis and summarization, demon-strating generalizability across RTL domains. 

Lightweight and Modular Reasoning: Our ap-proach avoids full LLM fine-tuning by adapting only the retriever, maintaining competitive perfor-mance relative to several strong baselines. 

2 Related Work 

Transformer-based code models such as Megatron-LM (Shoeybi et al., 2019), StarCoder (Li et al., 2023a), CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2022), CodeL-lama (Roziere et al., 2023), and Granite (Mishra et al., 2024) underpin much of the progress in multi-language generation and code reasoning. Prompt-ing techniques, including Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), CoDes (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024a), and CoT with self-verification (Ping et al., 2025), deliver structured reasoning for hardware-related tasks. ReAct prompting (Yao et al., 2023) adds iterative refine and act cycles to improve cor-rectness further. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) grounds LLM outputs with external context (Lewis et al., 2020; Petroni et al., 2021). Recent ex-tensions such as self-reflective and corrective RAG (Asai et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024) and document-level prompting (Zhou et al., 2022) reduce halluci-nations and streamline domain adaptation. Frame-works such as REDCODER (Parvez et al., 2021) have applied RAG for code summarization and gen-eration in general-purpose languages, illustrating benefits of dual retrieval and generation. In hardware design, modular RAG and reasoning strategies are emerging. VerilogCoder uses a task and circuit relation graph and AST-based debug-ging to exceed 90% pass rates on Verilog bench-marks (Ho et al., 2025). HDLCoRe and HDLde-bugger add hardware-aware prompt decomposition plus evidence filtering (Ping et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024). ComplexVCoder implements a two-stage approach with intermediate representations and domain-specific RAG (Zuo et al., 2025). Multi-level summarization models like CodeV (Zhao et al., 2025) improve Verilog generation via instruc-tion tuning. All these methods rely on expensive model tuning or fine-tuning and typically focus only on Verilog or on one task, either synthesis or summarization. Efforts specifically targeting VHDL are limited. The VHDL-Eval benchmark (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024b) and CoDes for VHDL (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024a) highlight consistent weaknesses of LLMs on VHDL, underscoring the need for meth-ods that can handle both synthesis and summa-rization. Our approach, S YM DIREC, uniquely ad-dresses these gaps. It incorporates symbolic logic as a structured intermediate representation, enhanc-ing both decomposition and retrieval. Unlike graph-only RAG frameworks, symbolic logic captures functional intent, allowing more precise retrieval and verification. SYM DIREC is among the few systems evaluated on both Verilog and VHDL, and the first to jointly tackle synthesis and summariza-tion across both languages. The neuro-symbolic combination composed of symbolic decomposi-tion, retriever tuning for RTL semantics, and LLM-guided verification surpasses prior art in perfor-mance while maintaining interpretability and mod-ular reasoning. 

3 Neuro-Symbolic Divide-Retrieve-Conquer (S YM DIREC) Framework 

3.1 Overview 

We introduce SYM DIREC, a unified neuro-symbolic framework designed for two complemen-tary tasks in register-transfer level (RTL) design: (i) synthesis , where natural language (NL) prob-lem statements or specifications are translated into their corresponding RTL code; and (ii) summariza-tion , where RTL modules are converted into inter-pretable NL explanations augmented with symbolic logic. By integrating symbolic reasoning into our pipeline, S YM DIREC ensures semantically mean-ingful decomposition, retrieval, and verification. The symbolic representations act as an intermedi-ate scaffold that enhances both retrieval precision and output correctness, especially in the context of more challenging RTL semantics. S YM DIRECfollows a three-stage architecture (refer Figure 2) shared across both synthesis and summarization: 

Divide (Symbolic Decomposition) : The input, ei-ther a natural language specification or RTL code, is decomposed into smaller, semantically mean-ingful sub-components. Each sub-component is annotated with a brief textual description and a symbolic logic representation that captures its func-tional behavior. 

Retrieve (Symbolic Querying) : For each sub-component, the corresponding symbolic logic is used to retrieve relevant RTL snippets or symbolic summaries from a structured knowledge base. The retriever is trained to understand the alignment be-tween symbolic logic and RTL structures. 

Conquer (LLM Verification and Assembly) : An LLM evaluates the retrieved candidates based on their alignment with the symbolic logic and de-scription, selects the top candidate for each sub-component, and assembles them into a coherent RTL implementation or summary. 

3.2 Divide: Symbolic Decomposition 

The Divide stage decomposes the input into a set of interpretable sub-components, each represented by a symbolic logic expression and a correspond-ing textual or structural unit. This decomposition step provides structure and granularity to the task, enabling downstream retrieval and verification at a finer granularity. Formally, for an input X, the decomposition function is defined as: 

fDIV (X) = {(x1, ϕ 1), . . . , (xN , ϕ N )}

where xi is the ith sub-unit and ϕi is its associated symbolic logic representation. The number of sub-units N is dynamic and may vary with the complex-ity of the input; it is governed by prompting strate-gies or syntax-driven partitioning mechanisms. For synthesis tasks, the input X is a natural language specification. We use a pretrained LLM to decom-pose this specification into a sequence of short NL descriptions {xi}, each denoting a distinct func-tional sub-task (e.g., counter, comparator, multi-plexer). For each xi, we prompt the same LLM to produce a corresponding symbolic logic expression 

ϕi that captures the intended behavior in a logic-based form (e.g., temporal, Boolean, or dataflow ex-pressions). Optionally, we provide some in-context examples to encourage structured and consistent output formats grounded in symbolic hardware se-mantics. For summarization tasks, the input X is RTL code. We first parse the code into its abstract syntax tree (AST) and segment it into functional blocks {xi}, such as ‘always‘ blocks, modules, or combinational logic segments. For each block xi,we prompt an LLM to abstract its functional intent into a concise symbolic representation ϕi, typically capturing control logic, state transitions, or data transformations. We encourage structural consis-tency in these symbolic forms using prompt-based templates grounded in RTL semantics. 

LLM Guidance and Symbolic Abstraction: 

In both directions, symbolic abstraction relies on prompting a pretrained LLM to reason about hard-ware functionality and generate interpretable sym-bolic expressions. While LLMs may not always 16 

Divide  Retrieve  Conquer        

> LLM
> Design a 8 -bit
> Carry Ripple
> Adder….
> Lower 4 -bit
> Adder
> Upper 4 -bit
> Adder
> Carry
> Propagation
> Short Description & Symbolic Logic
> Representations
> Symbolic Retriever
> Retrieved Snippet 1
> ----------------------
> ENTITY 4_bit_adder
> ………..….
> Retrieved Snippet 3
> ----------------------
> ENTITY carry_prop
> ………………..
> LLM
> LLM -Guided Symbolic
> Verification & Assembly
> library IEEE;
> use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
> …….
> ENTITY RippleCarryAdder is
> Port (A: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(7
> downto 0);
> B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(7
> downto 0);…..
> Symbolic Decomposition

Figure 2: Illustration of our S YM DIREC framework for 8-bit carry ripple adder. 

produce complete or formal logic, their output of-ten provides high-quality approximations that cap-ture key semantic elements of the underlying sub-component. These symbolic sketches serve as an-chors for downstream retrieval and alignment. This decomposition process ensures that each sub-unit is semantically meaningful and structurally aligned with RTL design principles, enabling targeted re-trieval and robust composition in later stages. 

3.3 Retrieve: Symbolic Retriever 

The Retrieve stage enriches each sub-component 

(xi, ϕ i) with relevant RTL code snippets or sym-bolic/NL summaries. To leverage both the textual description xi and its formal symbolic logic ϕi, we design a joint embedding retriever that matches paired queries (xi, ϕ i) against a structured knowl-edge base K. We denote them as: 

fRET 

 xi, ϕ i

 = Ri = TopK y∈K score( xi, ϕ i; y).

3.3.1 Knowledge Base 

We construct a repository of S indexed entries: 

K = (yj , d j , ϕ j ) Sj=1 , where each entry contains: (a) yj : an RTL code snippet (VHDL/Verilog) or NL summary, (b) dj : a short NL explanation of yj ,and (c) ϕj : symbolic logic representation. 

3.3.2 Joint Retriever Architecture 

We implement a dual-encoder with three trans-former encoders: ex : X → RD, eϕ : Φ →

RD, ey : Y → RD, where ex embeds NL frag-ments x, eϕ embeds symbolic logic ϕ, and ey em-beds candidate entries y. To form a joint query representation, we concatenate and project: 

qi = Wq

ex(xi) ∥ eϕ(ϕi) ∈ RD,

with learned projection matrix Wq ∈ RD×2D. Re-trieval then ranks each entry yj by cosine similarity: 

score( xi, ϕ i; yj ) = cos  qi, e y(yj ).

3.3.3 Training Objective 

We fine-tune all three encoders on our R TL -IR dataset of aligned triplets {(xp, ϕ p, y p)}Sp=1 .In each batch of size B, the positive example 

(xp, ϕ p, y p) is contrasted against in-batch negatives 

{yq}q̸ =p. We minimize the multiple-negatives rank-ing loss and explore both dense (continuous embed-dings) and sparse (term-weighted) variants for ex

and eϕ; implementation and hyper-parameter de-tails appear in the Appendix B, along with dataset statistics and ablations. 

3.3.4 Inference: Retrieving Sub-components 

At inference time, each decomposed query (xi, ϕ i)

is encoded as qi and we compute the cosine simi-larity score between the computed query and can-didate yj ∈ K . The retriever returns the top -k

candidates as: 

Ri = fRET (xi, ϕ i) = TopK j∈[1 ,S ] score( xi, ϕ i; yj ),

yielding Ri = {ri,m }km=1 . Each ri,j is either an RTL snippet (for synthesis) or a NL summary (for summarization). Table 4 presents a qualitative ex-ample of an 8-bit ripple-carry adder, including sym-bolic decompositions into Boolean/logical expres-sions for each submodule and the retrieved Verilog and VHDL code snippets tied to these submodules. 

3.4 Conquer with LLM-Guided Verification and Assembly 

The Conquer stage integrates retrieved candidates into a finalized output. Given the original input XMethod LLM Pass@1 ROUGE -L Verilog VHDL Verilog VHDL                                                                                  

> Vanilla Prompting GPT-4o 0.543 0.285 43 .139 .3
> Llama-3 0.385 0.226 40 .234 .1
> CoDes GPT-4o 0.602 0.348 46 .943 .2
> Llama-3 0.435 0.274 43 .539 .5
> ReAct Prompting GPT-4o 0.616 0.353 46 .143 .0
> Llama-3 0.437 0.291 42 .938 .8
> VRAG-CodeBERT GPT-4o 0.688 0.487 53 .250 .3
> Llama-3 0.527 0.396 47 .444 .5
> VRAG-FT GPT-4o 0.719 0.531 57 .052 .8
> Llama-3 0.569 0.439 50 .548 .1
> RTLCoder (open-source) Mistral 0.625 ∗---GPT-4o/Llama-3 ----CodeV (instruction-tuned) CodeQwen 0.532 ∗---GPT-4o/Llama-3 ----SYM DIREC (ours) GPT-4o 0.805 ±0.020 0.634 ±0.022 62 .5±0.015 56 .6±0.018
> Llama-3 0.652 ±0.022 0.545 ±0.020 56 .1±0.018 50 .8±0.015
> SYM DIREC-GT (oracle) GPT-4o 0.902 0.842 70.2 64.7
> Llama-3 0.807 0.721 63.3 57.9

Table 1: RTL synthesis (Pass@1) and summarization (R OUGE -L) performance across methods and LLMs. For our SYM DIREC, mean ± standard deviation over five independent runs is reported. Results are statistically significant vs. the strongest baseline (paired t-test, p < 0.01 ). ∗ indicates results reported in the original papers. 

and the retrieved sets {Ri}Ni=1 , the final artifact ˆY

is produced by: ˆY = fCONQ 

 X, {Ri}Ni=1 

, where 

ˆY is either the synthesized RTL module or the sum-marized NL description. Given Ri = {ri,m }km=1 

are the top -k candidates for each sub-component 

i, from Section 3.3, we prompt the generator LLM to assign an alignment score by condition-ing on the sub-component xi and its associated symbolic logic representation ϕi ∀m ∈ { 1, k }

as: ˆαi,m = verify _score  ri,m , x i, ϕ i

 ∈ [0 , 1]; 

These scores reflect both functional correctness and fidelity of retriever results to the symbolic speci-fication. We select the highest - scoring candidate for each sub-component. This yields a verified set of sub-modules or summaries {ˆri}Ni=1 . The final assembly invokes the LLM conditioned on X and the verified candidates. This step produces a co-herent RTL design or comprehensive NL summary, ensuring consistent naming, module connectivity, and logical integrity. 

4 Experiments 

This section outlines our experimental setup, in-cluding RTL benchmarks (in both VHDL and Ver-ilog), a diverse suite of baseline models, and eval-uation metrics designed to assess the effective-ness, generalization, and efficiency of the proposed SYM DIREC framework. Refer Appendix A for full implementation and dataset details. Our eval-uation is structured around the following research questions: (RQ1) Effectiveness of S YM DIREC: 

How effective is the S YM DIREC framework for RTL synthesis and summarization, compared to existing baseline approaches? (RQ2) Impact of Symbolic Logic: To what extent do symbolic logic representations improve retrieval quality and down-stream RTL generation or summarization? (RQ3) Hyperparameter Sensitivity: How do key hyper-parameters affect the performance of S YM DIREC? 

4.1 Benchmarks and Baselines 

We evaluate S YM DIREC on two standard RTL benchmarks: Verilog-Eval , comprising 156 func-tional Verilog tasks from HDLBits (Liu et al., 2023) with testbenches, and VHDL-Eval , containing 202 VHDL tasks translated from Verilog-Eval or pub-lic tutorials (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024b), with analogous verification procedures. Our compar-isons include zero-shot prompting, intermediate plan-based CoDes (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024a), iterative ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), Vanilla RAG (VRAG-CodeBERT), and RAG fine-tuned on the 

RTL-IR dataset (VRAG-FT). We also include re-cent domain-specialized models RTLCoder (Liu et al., 2024) and CodeV (Zhao et al., 2025). Fi-13 Figure 3: Ablation results: Performance with varying (a) number of sub-components and (b) chunking strategy.           

> RTL-IR Dataset Statistics # Total Size ∼50 .5k# Text-to-Code Pairs ∼8k# FEC Pairs ∼13 .5k# Code-to-Summary Pairs ∼6.5k# Partial-to-Complete Code Pairs ∼22 .5k
> Table 2: Dataset statistics of RTL-IR used for model finetuning and retrieval enhancement.

nally, we evaluate S YM DIREC and its oracle vari-ant using ground-truth snippets (S YM DIREC-GT). The RTL-IR dataset is a curated collection of RTL code and annotations used to finetune RAG mod-els, comprising text-to-code, functionally equiv-alent code (FEC), code-to-summary, and partial-to-complete code pairs. Table 2 summarizes the dataset statistics. Detailed dataset descriptions, benchmarks, and additional examples are provided in Appendix A, C. Baselines use GPT-4o and Llama-3 (70B), evaluated with Pass@1 for syn-thesis and R OUGE -L for summarization. Results report mean ± std over 5 runs with paired t-tests. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

For RTL synthesis, we use the metric Pass@1, which denotes the proportion of first-attempt RTL designs that successfully pass the self-checking testbenches provided in the Verilog -Eval and VHDL -Eval benchmarks. For code summarization, we employ R OUGE - L, measuring the longest com-mon subsequence (LCS) between generated and reference summaries and computing an F-measure to assess fluency and coherence (Lin, 2004). 

5 Results & Discussion 

5.1 Overall Performance of S YM DIREC

Table 1 compares S YM DIREC against strong baselines, including prompting-only methods and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) strategies. Our neuro-symbolic pipeline consistently outper-forms all alternatives, demonstrating the effective-ness of symbolic decomposition, a domain-adapted retriever, and LLM-guided verification. 

5.2 Effectiveness of S YM DIREC (RQ1) 

Vanilla Prompting serves as the zero-shot lower bound for each model, showing the weakest per-formance across both synthesis and summariza-tion tasks. In contrast, S YM DIREC-GT repre-sents an approximate upper bound for RAG-based methods, as it always includes the ground-truth among the top-k retrieved candidates. Despite having the correct solution in context, the failure of S YM DIREC-GT in specific experimental cases indicates that the LLM can still struggle to filter out distractors within the retrieved candidates or may lack sufficient RTL-specific reasoning capa-bilities. Chain-of-Descriptions (CoDes) and Re-Act prompting yield comparable performance. Re-Act demonstrates a modest edge ( ∼5-8%) rela-tive improvement in Pass@1, likely because its iterative reasoning/action loop allows correction pathways that simplistic descriptive chains lack. Among RAG strategies, VRAG-FT with a fine-tuned retriever consistently outperforms VRAG-CodeBERT, achieving ∼10%-15% relative im-provement in Pass@1 and ∼5%-8% in R OUGE - L. This suggests that while generic code retrievers benefit RTL tasks, task-specific tuning further en-hances retrieval quality by aligning natural lan-guage queries more effectively with RTL semantics. SYM DIREC outperforms all baselines by signifi-cant margins: up to ∼80% relative improvement over the best prompt-based method and up to ∼20% over RAG-only baselines in Pass@1. For summa-rization, S YM DIREC yields up to ∼35% gains over prompting and ∼10% over RAG in R OUGE -L, highlighting the benefits of symbolic planning and RTL-aware retrieval; the remaining ∼10–15% gap to S YM DIREC-GT indicates room to improve retriever precision and LLM alignment. 

5.3 Impact of Symbolic Logic (RQ2) 

To isolate the benefit of symbolic logic, we com-pare three pipeline variants: VRAG - FT, which ap-plies a fine-tuned retriever on NL queries; DiReC, which uses the same Divide–Retrieve–Conquer structure but uses NL-only queries for retrieval; and our full S YM DIREC, which incorporates sym-bolic decomposition with modular retrieval and LLM-guided verification. We find that S YM DI-REC achieves ∼10-15% relative improvements in Pass@1 (refer Figure 3(a)) and R OUGE -L ver-sus both VRAG - FT and DiReC. These findings demonstrate that symbolic representations serve as a strong scaffolding mechanism, enabling more pre-cise retrieval, reducing noise, and thereby enhanc-ing both synthesis and summarization outcomes. 

5.4 Hyperparameter Sensitivity (RQ3) 

We perform ablations to explore how key hyperpa-rameters, namely the number of sub-components (N ) and retrieval depth ( k), affect S YM DIREC’s performance. Figures 3(b) and (c) summarize the results. Increasing N from 2 to 6 leads to consistent improvements in Pass@1; however, performance starts to decline when N exceeds 6, likely due to excessive fragmentation that results in semantically weaker sub-units. Importantly, the optimal value of 

N is task-dependent . Simpler combinational tasks (e.g., adders, multiplexers) benefit from smaller decompositions ( N ≈ 3–4), while multi-stage se-quential designs (e.g., counters, FSMs) achieve better performance with slightly larger N (N ≈ 4–

5), reflecting their increased structural complexity. For retrieval depth, performance improves as k in-creases up to 5, but plateaus and eventually drops when k becomes too large. This decline is likely caused by additional noise introduced by less rele-vant retrievals. Across benchmarks, a default con-figuration of N = 4 and k = 5 provides a strong balance between synthesis accuracy, summariza-tion quality, and computational efficiency, while allowing task-specific tuning when appropriate. 

6 Error Analysis 

We perform a detailed error analysis to understand the limitations of S YM DIREC in RTL synthesis and summarization. Our investigation focuses on three major sources of errors: (a) Symbolic De-composition Errors: Approximately 8-10% of sub-components have incomplete or inconsistent symbolic expressions, particularly for multi-bit comparators or sequential elements. These errors correlate with lower retrieval precision, reducing Pass@1 performance by up to 5-7% for affected designs; (b) Retrieval Mismatches: Even with symbolic scaffolds, around 12-15% of retrieved candidates only partially match the intended behav-ior or contain distractors. This results in a 3-6% drop in Pass@1 accuracy and 2-4 R OUGE - L points in summarization; and (c) LLM Assembly & Ver-ification Failures: When retrieved candidates are correct, the LLM occasionally fails to integrate them properly (signal misalignment, missing con-nections, or carry propagation issues), observed in roughly 6-8% of sub-components. These fail-ures contribute to a remaining gap of ∼10-15% be-tween S YM DIREC and the oracle S YM DIREC-GT in synthesis and 6–8 R OUGE - L points in summa-rization. Qualitative inspection shows that most failures occur in hierarchical designs or uncommon module patterns. The S YM DIREC-GT results sug-gest that improved retrieval precision and symbolic reasoning could close a significant portion of the performance gap. 

7 Conclusion 

We presented S YM DIREC, a neuro-symbolic Di-vide–Retrieve–Conquer framework for RTL synthe-sis and summarization across Verilog and VHDL. By integrating symbolic decomposition, domain-adapted retrieval, and LLM-guided verification, SYM DIREC effectively bridges the gap between formal hardware semantics and large language model generation. Unlike prior approaches that rely heavily on instruction tuning or overlook sym-bolic intent, our method introduces structured in-termediate reasoning to improve both retrieval rel-evance and generation correctness. Empirical re-sults demonstrate consistent improvements over prompting- and RAG-based baselines, with gains in synthesis accuracy and summarization quality. This work underscores the utility of symbolic plan-ning in program synthesis and opens new directions for interpretable and modular neuro-symbolic sys-tems in hardware design automation and beyond. 

Limitations 

While S YM DIREC demonstrates strong perfor-mance in RTL synthesis and summarization, sev-eral limitations remain. Symbolic decomposition depends on the LLM’s ability to generate well-formed symbolic expressions. Smaller or less capa-ble models may produce incomplete or inconsistent decompositions, diminishing the symbolic scaffold-ing benefits and yielding performance similar to natural language-only queries. The LLM-guided verification in the C ONQUER stage can also fail to align retrieved candidates with the intended logic, particularly when top-k retrievals include distrac-tors or partially matching snippets. Decomposi-tion granularity is sensitive: overly fine segmenta-tion fragments the input, producing weak sub-units, while overly coarse segmentation may reduce re-trieval precision. The current pipeline is restricted to single-file RTL designs and does not support hier-archical or multi-file projects, where cross-module dependencies are common. Scaling to such designs may require advanced AST processing, block- and function-level chunking, and multi-level summa-rization strategies. Even with the correct solution retrieved, the LLM may fail to select it, highlight-ing challenges in noise filtering, candidate ranking, and reasoning under imperfect retrieval. Address-ing these issues: improving symbolic reasoning, retrieval alignment, and hierarchical abstraction, will be essential to extending S YM DIREC to com-plex real-world hardware design scenarios. 

Ethics Statement 

We use publicly available datasets (e.g., Verilog-Eval) and our curated RTL-IR dataset, which is sourced from permissively licensed GitHub reposi-tories (MIT, BSD, Apache-2.0); license metadata is provided in the supplementary material. No private or sensitive data was used; outputs are intended for research and developer-assist purposes only. Po-tential risks include generating hardware designs that may be incorrect or unsafe if deployed without verification. Our system is intended as a developer-assist tool, and all outputs should be validated us-ing standard testbenches and human review before real-world use. 

References 

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yongchao Chen, Yilun Hao, Yang Zhang, and Chuchu Fan. 2025. Code-as-symbolic-planner: Foundation model-based robot planning via symbolic code gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01700 .Elastic. 2024. Machine learning: Natural language processing with elastic. https://www.elastic. co/guide/en/machine-learning/current/ ml-nlp-elser.html . Accessed: March 21, 2025. Thibault Formal, Carlos Lassance, Benjamin Pi-wowarski, and Stéphane Clinchant. 2021. Splade v2: Sparse lexical and expansion model for informa-tion retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10086 .Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasu-pat, and Mingwei Chang. 2020. Retrieval augmented language model pre-training. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 3929–3938. PMLR. Chia-Tung Ho, Haoxing Ren, and Brucek Khailany. 2025. Verilogcoder: Autonomous verilog coding agents with graph-based planning and abstract syntax tree (ast)-based waveform tracing tool. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pages 300–307. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,33:9459–9474. Raymond Li, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christo-pher Akiki, Jia LI, Jenny Chim, Qian Liu, and 1 others. 2023a. Starcoder: may the source be with you! Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. 2023b. Towards general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281 .Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out .Mingjie Liu, Nathaniel Ross Pinckney, Brucek Khailany, and Haoxing Ren. 2023. Verilogeval: Evaluating large language models for verilog code generation. In ICCAD .Shang Liu, Wenji Fang, Yao Lu, Jing Wang, Qijun Zhang, Hongce Zhang, and Zhiyao Xie. 2024. Rtl-coder: Fully open-source and efficient llm-assisted rtl code generation technique. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems .Mayank Mishra, Matt Stallone, Gaoyuan Zhang, Yikang Shen, Aditya Prasad, Adriana Meza Soria, Michele Merler, Parameswaran Selvam, Saptha Surendran, Shivdeep Singh, and 1 others. 2024. Granite code models: A family of open foundation models for code intelligence. CoRR .Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loic Magne, and Nils Reimers. 2023. Mteb: Massive text embedding benchmark. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics . Association for Computational Linguistics. Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-lm: Empowering large language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In The 2023 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Md Rizwan Parvez, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Retrieval augmented code generation and sum-marization. In EMNLP-Findings .F Petroni, A Piktus, A Fan, PSH Lewis, M Yazdani, ND Cao, J Thorne, Y Jernite, V Karpukhin, J Mail-lard, and 1 others. 2021. Kilt: a benchmark for knowledge intensive language tasks. In NAACL-HLT ,pages 2523–2544. Association for Computational Linguistics. Heng Ping, Shixuan Li, Peiyu Zhang, Anzhe Cheng, Shukai Duan, Nikos Kanakaris, Xiongye Xiao, Wei Yang, Shahin Nazarian, Andrei Irimia, and 1 others. 2025. Hdlcore: A training-free framework for mit-igating hallucinations in llm-generated hdl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16528 .Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992. Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, and 1 others. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval , 3(4):333–389. Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, and 1 oth-ers. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 .Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catan-zaro. 2019. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 .Aivin V. Solatorio. 2024. Gistembed: Guided in-sample selection of training negatives for text embedding fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16829 .Prashanth Vijayaraghavan, Apoorva Nitsure, Charles Mackin, Luyao Shi, Stefano Ambrogio, Arvind Haran, Viresh Paruthi, Ali Elzein, Dan Coops, David Beymer, and 1 others. 2024a. Chain-of-descriptions: Improving code llms for vhdl code generation and summarization. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Machine Learning for CAD , pages 1–10. Prashanth Vijayaraghavan, Luyao Shi, Stefano Am-brogio, Charles Mackin, Apoorva Nitsure, David Beymer, and Ehsan Degan. 2024b. Vhdl-eval: A framework for evaluating large language models in vhdl code generation. In 2024 IEEE LLM Aided Design Workshop (LAD) , pages 1–6. IEEE. Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. 2021. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understand-ing and generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8696–8708. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. 2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Xufeng Yao, Haoyang Li, Tsz Ho Chan, Wenyi Xiao, Mingxuan Yuan, Yu Huang, Lei Chen, and Bei Yu. 2024. Hdldebugger: Streamlining hdl debugging with large language models. ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems .Dun Zhang. 2023. stella_en_400m_v5. https:// huggingface.co/dunzhang/stella_en_400M_v5 .Hugging Face model card, accessed on March 21, 2025. Yang Zhao, Di Huang, Chongxiao Li, Pengwei Jin, Muxin Song, Yinan Xu, Ziyuan Nan, Mingju Gao, Tianyun Ma, Lei Qi, and 1 others. 2025. Codev: Empowering llms with hdl generation through multi-level summarization. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems .Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F Xu, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. 2022. Docprompting: Gener-ating code by retrieving the docs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Jian Zuo, Junzhe Liu, Xianyong Wang, Yicheng Liu, Navya Goli, Tong Xu, Hao Zhang, Umamah-eswara Rao Tida, Zhenge Jia, and Mengying Zhao. 2025. Complexvcoder: An llm-driven framework for systematic generation of complex verilog code. 

> arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20653 .

A Datasets 

A.1 RTL-IR A.1.1 Data Collection and Preprocessing 

The dataset was curated from publicly available VHDL/Verilog repositories on GitHub. We fil-tered repositories based on permissive licensing and selected VHDL/Verilog projects with mean-ingful comments and README descriptions. The preprocessing pipeline involved: • Extracting comments and README docu-mentation. • Using in-context learning (ICL) with Granite-13b-Instruct to refine problem statements and code summaries. • Applying various transformations to generate functionally equivalent code pairs. 

Text-to-Code (TC) Pairs To construct TC pairs, we extracted natural language descriptions from comments in VHDL/Verilog files and relevant por-tions of README documentation. Since raw com-ments may be unstructured, ICL with Granite-13b-Instruct was used to generate structured problem statements. These statements were validated to ensure clarity and relevance to the corresponding VHDL/Verilog code. 

Code-to-Summary (CS) Pairs CS pairs were created by mapping VHDL/Verilog code to textual summaries. Code files with well-commented struc-tures were prioritized, and ICL was employed to convert detailed comments into concise summaries. To assess summary quality, we manually annotated 100 examples, classifying them into: • Good (clear, precise, and informative). • Acceptable (partially informative but useful). • Bad (incomplete or misleading). Overall, 84% of summaries were classified as good 

or acceptable , while 16% were bad . The latter were treated as “hard negatives.” 

Functionally Equivalent Code (FEC) Pairs 

FEC pairs were generated by applying different transformation strategies to create variations of functionally identical VHDL/Verilog code. The transformations include: • Type-2: Renaming identifiers while maintain-ing functional equivalence. We extracted and renamed entity, architecture, process, and port names using an LLM-based renaming strat-egy. Single-character identifiers were replaced with LLM-suggested alternatives, while com-plex identifiers underwent abbreviation, per-mutation, or transformation to maintain read-ability. • Type-3: Modifying statement order and intro-ducing functionally inert code, ensuring varia-tion while preserving functionality. Reorder-ing declarations and restructuring conditional logic introduced additional diversity. • Type-4: Back-translation between VHDL and Verilog using GHDL and ICARUS Iverilog. This process altered variable names and in-troduced intermediate signals, capturing func-tionally equivalent structures while minimiz-ing lexical similarities. Figure 4 illustrates these transformation types with examples. 

Partial-to-Complete Code (PC) Pairs PC pairs were created by extracting partial VHDL/Verilog snippets from larger codebases and pairing them with their complete versions. To ensure lexically di-verse representations, Type-2 transformations were applied to a subset of the complete versions. Snip-pet extraction was limited to code sections con-taining fewer than 1024 tokens, capturing function declarations and entity definitions along with rele-vant contextual comments. 

A.1.2 Quality Control Measures 

To ensure dataset integrity and usefulness, the fol-lowing quality control measures were applied: • Compilation Validation: All functionally transformed code underwent compilation tests to ensure correctness. • Testbench Execution: Available testbenches from GitHub were executed to verify func-tional equivalence. • Manual Review: Code summaries were man-ually reviewed, with low-quality summaries marked as “hard negatives.” These measures enhance dataset reliability, en-suring it serves as a strong benchmark for VHDL code generation and summarization tasks. 

B Training & Evaluation of Retriever 

Retrieval We fine-tune models from three cate-gories: sparse, dense, and hybrid retrievers, using the RTL-IR dataset. The sparse retriever is BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009). For dense models, we fine-tune top performers from the MTEB Leader-board (Muennighoff et al., 2023) (GTE-Qwen-1.5b (Li et al., 2023b), Stella-400m(Zhang, 2023), GIST-Large (Solatorio, 2024)), as well as CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2021) and Sentence Transformer (ST) (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) for code embed-dings. Hybrid methods include SPLADE (Formal et al., 2021) and ELSER(Elastic, 2024). All, except ELSER, are fine-tuned on the RTL-IR training set. We evaluate on the held-out test set. 

B.1 Evaluation Metric Retrieval: We employ Normalized Discounted Cu-mulative Gain (NDCG) to assess ranking quality, rewarding highly relevant results appearing earlier in the list. NDCG@1 measures the relevance of the top-ranked result, while NDCG@10 evaluates ranking effectiveness across the top 10 positions, assigning higher weights to top-ranked items. 

B.2 Performance of Retrievers 

Table 3 presents the performance of various re-trieval methods on the RTL-IR test set using NDCG@1 and NDCG@10 metrics. The results in-dicate that dense retrieval methods consistently out-perform hybrid and sparse approaches, as RTL-IR requires identifying semantically relevant matches beyond surface-level lexical overlaps. Among the evaluated models, CodeT5+ achieves the highest performance, with an NDCG@1 of 0.657 and an NDCG@10 of 0.872, demonstrating its strong abil-ity to retrieve relevant VHDL/Verilog code snip-pets. This performance advantage can be attributed to CodeT5+’s pre-training on VHDL/Verilog code before fine-tuning on RTL-IR. Text embedding models such as Stella-400m (NDCG@1 = 0.656) and GTE-Qwen-1.5b (NDCG@1 = 0.644) follow closely, despite being fine-tuned solely on the RTL-IR dataset. Their effectiveness is linked to their large parameter and embedding sizes (e.g., Stella-400m with an embedding size of 8192), enabling better generalization. However, CodeT5+’s code-specific training appears to compensate for its smaller embedding size, leading to superior retrieval performance. entity alu_4_bit is                                                                                                                   

> port (
> A, B:in std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
> op :in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);
> result :out std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
> overflow :out std_logic
> );
> end entity alu_4_bit;
> entity Four_Bit_ALU is
> port (
> P, Q:in std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
> op :in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);
> outcome :out std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
> OverflowOutput :out std_logic
> );
> end entity Four_Bit_ALU ;
> ….
> ….
> …
> architecture Structural of Dead_And_Gate is
> begin
> --Output the result of the AND gate
> output <= input1 and input2;
> end architecture Structural;
> architecture nand of top_module is
> begin
> out_nand <= not (a and b)
> ……
> ……
> architecture from_verilog of top_module is
> signal tmp_ivl_6: std_logic;
> begin
> tmp_ivl_6 <= pand q;
> output_nand <= not tmp_ivl_6;
> ……
> architecture Structural of DeadCode_And_Gate is
> begin
> process(input1, input2)
> variable i:integer := 1;
> begin
> while i<0loop
> null;
> end loop;
> --Output the result of the AND gate
> output <= input1 and input2;
> end process;
> end architecture Structural;
> Type 2
> Type 3
> Type 4

Figure 4: VHDL Samples of different transformation strategies applied using the three categories of code clones – Type 2, Type 3 and Type 4. 

Methods NDCG@1 NDCG@10 

BM25 0.434 0.570 ELSER 0.485 0.664 SPLADE 0.577 0.688 GTE-Qwen-1.5b 0.644 0.864 Stella-400m 0.656 0.866 GIST-Large 0.616 0.802 CodeT5+ 0.657 0.872 

ST 0.556 0.665 

Table 3: Evaluation of sparse, hybrid, and dense retriev-ers on RTL-IR test set. 

C Benchmarks and Baselines 

C.1 Benchmarks Verilog-Eval: 156 functional Verilog tasks sourced from HDLBits (Liu et al., 2023), each with a self-verifying testbench. The tasks span a variety of RTL constructs, including combinational logic, se-quential modules, counters, comparators, and sim-ple finite-state machines. 

VHDL-Eval: 202 VHDL tasks translated from Verilog-Eval problems or drawn from public VHDL tutorials (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024b), also with testbenches for functional verification. The suite maintains a similar functional diversity to Verilog-Eval. 

C.2 Baselines 

We compare S YM DIREC against several baselines, including recent domain-specialized models: 

Vanilla Prompting (ZS): Zero-shot, natural lan-guage to RTL code / summary generation. 

Chain-of-Descriptions (CoDes) (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2024a): Uses intermediate textual plans (de-scriptions) to guide LLM synthesis. 

ReAct Prompting (Yao et al., 2023):Iterative reasoning-and-action loops for stepwise generation and refinement. 

Vanilla RAG (VRAG-CodeBERT): Uses ageneric CodeBERT retriever without RTL-specific fine-tuning. 

VRAG-FT: RAG with a retriever fine-tuned on our RTL-IR dataset of aligned (NL, symbolic logic, RTL) triplets. 

RTLCoder (Liu et al., 2024): An open-source LLM trained specifically for RTL generation, de-signed to be efficient and locally deployable. 

CodeV (Zhao et al., 2025): Instruction-tuned Ver-ilog generation LLMs using a multi-level summa-rization strategy, shown to improve code generation by first summarizing then generating. 

SYM DIREC: Our full neuro-symbolic pipeline, combining symbolic decomposition, retrieval, and LLM-guided verification. 

SYM DIREC-GT (Oracle): An upper -bound vari-ant that retrieves using ground-truth symbolic snip-pets, to assess ideal retrieval conditions. C.3 LLM Settings and Evaluation 

We run all methods using two LLMs: a propri-etary model (GPT - 4o) and an open-source model (Llama - 3, 70B). Synthesis correctness is measured via self-verifying testbenches using Pass@1, and summarization quality is scored using R OUGE -L against reference summaries. For statistical robust-ness, we perform five independent runs per setting and report mean and standard deviation; paired t- tests (e.g., comparing S YM DIREC vs VRAG - FT or vs other baselines) are computed and reported in the main results table. 

D Implementation Details & Computation Cost 

Our system is implemented in Python using the PyTorch framework, enabling flexible model devel-opment and efficient training. Retriever fine-tuning is performed on two NVIDIA V100 GPUs, which allows for effective processing our RTL-IR dataset. We orchestrate LLM queries using LangChain, and index high-dimensional vector representations with Milvus, a high-performance vector database offer-ing both in-memory and GPU-accelerated similar-ity search. In contrast, traditional search solutions such as Elasticsearch (Elastic, 2024) and Elastic’s Learned Sparse Encoder Representations (ELSER) (Elastic, 2024) serve as baselines; while Elastic-search excels in full-text search, its semantic re-trieval is limited compared to Milvus and ELSER. Our S YM DIREC pipeline processes multiple prompts per task in parallel, achieving an average turnaround time of approximately 5–10 seconds. This efficiency demonstrates the practical viability of our approach for RTL code synthesis and sum-marization tasks. These implementation choices align with recent literature on retrieval-augmented generation (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020) and domain-specific fine-tuning strategies. The integration of advanced indexing via Milvus and query orchestration using LangChain not only out-performs traditional retrieval methods but also sub-stantially enhances the overall performance of our system. Task Symbolic Decomposition Retrieved Context 

8-bit Ripple Carry Adder LSB Half-Adder: S0 = A0 ⊕ B0,

C1 = A0 ∧ B0

Bits 1–7 Full-Adders: Si = Ai ⊕ Bi ⊕

Ci, Ci+1 = ( Ai ∧ Bi) ∨ (Bi ∧ Ci) ∨

(Ai ∧ Ci)

Half-Adder (LSB) 

Verilog: 

module half_adder(input a, b, o utput sum, carry); assign sum = a ^ b; assign carry = a & b; endmodule 

VHDL: 

entity half_adder is port(a, b: in std_logic; sum, carry: out std_logic); end entity; architecture rtl of half_adder is begin sum <= a xor b; carry <= a and b; end architecture; 

Full-Adder (bits 1–7) 

Verilog: 

module full_adder(input a, b, cin, output sum, cout); assign sum = a ^ b ^ cin; assign cout = (a & b) | (b & cin) | (a & cin); endmodule 

VHDL: 

entity full_adder is port(a, b, cin: in std_logic; sum, cout: out std_logic); end entity; architecture rtl of full_adder is begin sum <= a xor b xor cin; cout <= (a and b) or (b and cin) or (a and cin); end architecture; 

Table 4: Qualitative example for 8-bit ripple carry adder. Symbolic decomposition shows Boolean/logical expres-sions for each submodule. Retrieved context contains modular Verilog and VHDL code snippets corresponding to these submodules. All submodules passed simulation/testbench.