Title: Self-Guided Plan Extraction for Instruction-Following Tasks with Goal-Conditional Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20601v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 01:18:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Self-Guided Plan Extraction for Instruction-Following Tasks with Goal-Conditional Reinforcement Learning 

Zoya Volovikova 1,2 Nikita Sorokin 1 Dmitriy Lukashevskiy 2

Aleksandr Panov 1,2 Alexey Skrynnik 1,21AXXX, 2MIRAI 

Abstract 

We introduce SuperIgor, a framework for instruction-following tasks. Unlike prior meth-ods that rely on predefined subtasks, SuperIgor enables a language model to generate and refine high-level plans through a self-learning mech-anism, reducing the need for manual dataset annotation. Our approach involves iterative co-training: an RL agent is trained to follow the generated plans, while the language model adapts and modifies these plans based on RL feedback and preferences. This creates a feed-back loop where both the agent and the planner improve jointly. We validate our framework in environments with rich dynamics and stochas-ticity. Results show that SuperIgor agents ad-here to instructions more strictly than baseline methods, while also demonstrating strong gen-eralization to previously unseen instructions. 

1 Introduction 

The instruction-following task (Shridhar et al., 2020; Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2021) studies how an AI agent can achieve a goal specified through a natural-language instruc-tion. Prior work in this area is commonly divided into two paradigms: learning from demonstrations and learning from experience. Demonstration-based approaches rely on expert trajectories (e.g., VPT (Baker et al., 2022), STEVE-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023), Jarvis-VLA (Li et al., 2025)) and exhibit strong generalization to unseen tasks and environ-ments (Fan et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024; Gray et al., 2019). However, their scalability is funda-mentally constrained by the high cost of collecting large quantities of high-quality demonstrations, as highlighted in SIMA 2 (Bolton et al., 2025). In contrast, experience-based methods, typically framed as reinforcement learning, learn directly from the agent’s own interactions with the envi-ronment without expert supervision (Hill et al., 2021; Mathur and Ahmed, 2025). While concep-

Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of the SuperIgor frame-work designed for Instruction Following 

tually more scalable, these methods face substan-tially greater challenges, most notably the diffi-culty of grounding natural-language instructions in long-horizon behavior under sparse and delayed rewards (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018; Hanjie et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2020). To make progress despite these challenges, most experience-based instruction-following methods have been studied in controlled and simplified environments, such as grid-world or cell-based domains, where obser-vations are often symbolic rather than pixel-based, instructions are procedurally generated, and linguis-tic diversity is limited (Volovikova et al., 2025). A natural way to strengthen experience-based instruction-following agents is to incorporate high-level planning through language models, which helps interpret complex and underspecified tasks. By leveraging world knowledge encoded in large language models, such planning can reduce the ex-ploration space and accelerate learning (Jansen, 2020; Zhou et al., 2025). Existing planning-based approaches typically adopt a common de-sign choice: planning is performed over a pre-

> arXiv:2604.20601v1 [cs.AI] 22 Apr 2026

defined and finite set of subgoals whose comple-tion can be explicitly verified by the environment. This assumption enables generated subgoals to be grounded in an existing skill library via heuristics or similarity-based matching (Logeswaran et al., 2022), provides dense intermediate rewards, and allows automatic skill switching during execution, thereby bypassing the need to learn low-level poli-cies from scratch (Ichter et al., 2023). Furthermore, many planning-based systems rely on very large language models (100B+ parameters), which fur-ther limits their practicality and scalability. These limitations raise an important question: how can we learn a low-level policy for instruc-tion following in environments without predefined low-level skills? We address this challenge by proposing SuperIgor, a reinforcement-learning-based framework that integrates high-level plan-ning through large language models. SuperIgor adopts a self-learning strategy that allows the agent to iteratively refine its plans based on its own experience, and to learn effectively from sparse and delayed instruction-level rewards provided only upon successful task completion. We fur-ther demonstrate that SuperIgor operates effec-tively in CrafText, a dynamic, partially observable, and open-ended environment, highlighting its ap-plicability beyond simplified instruction-following benchmarks. To conclude, our contributions are as follows: • We propose a new self-supervised training paradigm for the instruction-following task, where high-level plans are generated and refined through interaction between a lan-guage model and a reinforcement learning agent—without requiring any manually an-notated datasets. • We introduce a special curriculum to train an RL agent to accurately follow the plan despite sparse reward conditions. • We implement our approach in the CrafText benchmark and achieve state-of-the-art per-formance on out-of-distribution tasks, demon-strating the robustness and flexibility of our framework in dynamic and partially observ-able environments. The dataset and code for SuperIgor are publicly available 1.

> 1https://sites.google.com/view/ super-igor

2 Related Work 

Instruction Following with RL . One of the most common strategies for training agents with RL on instruction-following tasks is to jointly encode the instruction and the agent’s observations, enabling alignment between linguistic and perceptual modal-ities. A prominent line of work relies on shared representation models such as CLIP (Yao et al., 2022), or feature modulation techniques like FiLM layers (Perez et al., 2018; Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2020), to project language in-formation into visual or state representations (Pais-cher et al., 2023; Hanjie et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021). Alternatively, transformer-based architec-tures process multimodal inputs jointly to improve instruction understanding and execution. This in-cludes embodied language models such as Em-BERT (Suglia et al., 2021) as well as Vision-and-Language Navigation frameworks (Savva et al., 2019). Another direction explores model-based reinforcement learning, where agents learn struc-tured policies conditioned on textual goals; Dy-nalang (Lin et al., 2024) is a representative exam-ple of this approach, emphasizing learning world dynamics alongside goal-conditioned behavior. 

Instruction Following and Planning . Recent work has demonstrated that large language mod-els, when fine-tuned on suitable datasets, are ca-pable of generating detailed, coherent action plans for agents based on textual instructions (Jansen, 2020; Zhou et al., 2025). Building on this abil-ity, subsequent approaches have shown that plan-ning performance can be further improved by in-corporating feedback from the environment (Wang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Volovikova et al., 2024). For example SayCan (Ichter et al., 2023) augments planning with affordance-based evalua-tion via offline reinforcement learning, while (Tan et al., 2024) leverages policy optimization and prob-ability normalization to enhance learning through interaction. Beyond improving general plan quality, environment feedback can also enable personalized planning; for example, (Han et al., 2025) intro-duced Reinforced Self-Training to iteratively align agents’ behavior with user preferences in object rearrangement tasks. Alternatively, Logeswaran et al. (2022) proposed a different strategy by avoid-ing language model fine-tuning altogether, instead generating multiple candidate plans with a frozen model and ranking them using mutual information and a learned feasibility model. 3 Problem Statement 

The environment is formalized as a goal-based Partially Observable Markov Deci-sion Process (POMDP), defined by the tuple 

(S, A, O, T , R, G, γ ). The agent receives a natural language instruction I and must achieve the corresponding latent goal g ∈ G . Each observation 

o ∈ O contains partial information about both the environment and the instruction I. The agent learns a grounding function fg(I) to infer the latent goal g = fg(I).The policy π(a | o) selects actions based on observations to maximize the expected cumulative reward: 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

Eπ

" TX

> t=0

γtR(st, a t, g ) o0

#

.

The environment involves stochastic transitions 

T (s′ | s, a ) and partial observability, requiring the agent to infer goals and act effectively under uncertainty. We extend this setup by introducing plans . In the planning-augmented formulation, the agent does not receive the instruction I directly. Instead, it is provided with a plan p = ( p1, p 2, . . . , p n) de-rived from I, where each step pi corresponds to an intermediate subgoal gi = fg(pi). At each timestep, the agent observes the environment to-gether with the current plan step pϕ(t). The opti-mization objective becomes: 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

Eπ

" TX

> t=0

γtR  st, a t, g ϕ(t)

 o0

#

,

where gϕ(t) is the subgoal associated with the active plan step. In contrast to settings with predefined subtasks and explicit intermediate rewards, our formulation introduces two key challenges: 1. Subtask alignment under sparse rewards. 

The agent must discover how its behavior aligns with intermediate subgoals despite only receiving sparse, delayed feedback upon com-pleting the full instruction. This exacerbates the credit assignment problem. 2. Extended action space. The agent must also decide when to terminate the current subtask. This requires augmenting the action space with control operations (e.g., a DONE action), which increases both exploration complexity and the difficulty of learning effective switch-ing strategies. 

4 Super Igor 

Super Igor framework proposes a method for jointly training a large language model and a re-inforcement learning agent to solve instruction-following tasks. The LLM is responsible for trans-forming natural language instructions into struc-tured plans, i.e. sequences of subtasks. The RL agent learns to execute these plans in the environ-ment by interacting with it and maximizing delayed rewards. The training process proceeds through the fol-lowing stages: 1. Plan Generation (4.1): The LLM extracts possible subtasks from instructions and gen-erates multiple candidate plans in natural lan-guage during the initial cycle (Cycle 1). In subsequent cycles (Cycle 2–N), the candidate pool is iteratively refined by filtering and re-prioritization, based on how well the plans align with the RL agent’s performance. 2. Policy Learning (4.2): The RL agent is trained to execute the selected plans in the environment. 3. Plan Validation (4.3): The quality of can-didate plans is evaluated according to the RL agent’s success rate and execution trajectories. 4. LLM Fine-Tuning (4.4): The language model is fine-tuned with feedback derived from validation, aligning its scoring of plans with the agent’s actual performance. 

4.1 Plan Generation 

In our approach, we first generate all possible plans for the training set in zero-shot mode during the initial cycle. In subsequent cycles, we progres-sively reduce the set of candidate plans by filtering out those that perform poorly for the agent. Con-cretely, the initial cycle produces the complete pool of plans, while later cycles re-prioritize them us-ing the LLM’s negative log-likelihood (NLL) score. Importantly, we leverage the agent’s performance feedback as a preference signal to fine-tune the LLM with DPO, so that the model learns to align its scoring with the agent’s actual success in exe-cuting the plans. Figure 2: Super Igor Pipeline: The pipeline consists of four stages: (1) a language model generates multiple plan options for a given instruction; (2) a policy model is trained via PPO to execute each plan in the environment; (3) each plan is validated by measuring its execution success rate; (4) the language model is optimized using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)(Rafailov et al., 2023) based on plan performance scores. This iterative loop refines both plan generation and execution. 

Training plans generation (Cycle 1). 

Since the language model used for plan genera-tion may not fully capture the exact dependencies and interaction rules of the target environment, we propose a structured procedure that separates the identification of goals from the reasoning about prerequisite constraints. The method unfolds in four steps. First, we build a subtask base by extracting and canonicalizing possible subtasks from the instruc-tion dataset, creating a unified vocabulary that re-duces synonymy and ensures consistency. Each subtask is expressed in natural language, but in a strict normalized format that allows passing them one-by-one to the policy without ambiguity. Second, the model generates a goal-level plan ,producing for each instruction a single conceptual representation of its intended outcome, expressed in terms of the established subtask base. This step abstracts away from concrete execution details and captures only the high-level intent. Third, we induce a subtask ontology that en-codes the model’s hypotheses about prerequisite relations, i.e., which subtasks must be completed before others can be attempted. This provides a structured view of dependencies across the subtask base. Finally, we perform plan expansion , where the single conceptual plan is unfolded into multiple detailed plans, with their number corresponding to the hypotheses proposed by the model. The ontol-ogy ensures that these expanded variants remain consistent with prerequisite relations and avoid con-tradictions. This approach provides two key benefits. First, it improves plan consistency by constructing plans from a shared set of subtasks and their relations, rather than from independent and potentially con-tradictory structures. Second, it supports partial normalization, since the model, when processing new instructions, tends to reuse previously iden-tified subtasks, thereby reducing the proliferation of synonymous formulations. The details of the method and pseudocode are provided in Appendix A, and the prompts are presented in Appendix L. 

Plans re-prioretizing for RL-agent (Cycles 2-N). After obtaining the initial feedback on agent performance for the generated plans and applying LLM fine-tuning (Subsection 4.4), subsequent cy-cles focus on re-prioritizing the candidate set. In each cycle, plans are rescored using the language model’s negative log-likelihood (NLL), which re-flects how natural or plausible a plan is according to the model. Plans are then ranked by this score, and only the top-performing subset is retained for fur-ther training. As cycles progress, this iterative filter-ing process gradually narrows the candidate space, aligning the remaining plans both with the agent’s empirical success and with the model’s learned preferences. 4.2 Policy Learning 

After the plans have been generated, we train a reinforcement learning agent using the stepwise plan observation setting (Subsection 3). At each timestep, the agent observes the environment and receives an embedding of the current plan step. It must learn to align actions with plan steps based on a delayed reward signal provided only upon successful completion of the entire plan. We use the PPO algorithm to train the policy. 

Algorithm 1 Skill Curriculum Learning                                       

> Require: Set of all plans P, success-rate threshold τ
> 1: Initialize mastered skills M ← ∅
> 2: Initialize PPO agent πθ
> 3: Initialize active plans
> S ← { p∈ P | pcontains exactly one skill }
> 4: while training not converged do
> 5: Train πθon active plans Sand collect rollouts 6: For each skill s, compute success rate:
> SR (s) = # Successful episodes containing s
> # Total episodes containing s
> 7: if SR (s)≥τthen
> 8: Add to mastered skills M ← M ∪ { s}
> 9: end if
> 10: Update plans
> S ← { p∈ P | phas at most one unmastered skill }
> 11: end while
> 12: return πθ,M

To address the sparse reward problem in training, we introduce Skill Curriculum Learning . The core principle is to create a dynamic curriculum that begins with the simplest single-subtask tasks, allowing the agent to learn foundational behaviors under a relatively dense reward signal. As the agent trains, we monitor its Success Rate (SR) for each subtask. Once a subtask’s SR sur-passes a predefined threshold τ , it is marked as "mastered." This mastery triggers an update to the curriculum: the set of active training plans is ex-panded to include any plan composed of already mastered subtasks and, at most, one new, unmas-tered subtask. This incremental expansion, detailed in Algorithm 1, ensures a smooth learning gradient and prevents the agent from being overwhelmed. 

4.3 Plan Validation 

To evaluate each proposed plan, we run the RL agent multiple times using that plan as input. Be-cause the environment is highly stochastic, a single rollout is insufficient; instead, we aggregate met-rics such as average success rate to obtain a reliable estimate of plan effectiveness. 

4.4 LLM Fine-Tuning 

In the first cycle, we warm-start the language model with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to reproduce the plans generated in the zero-shot stage (Section 4.1), aligning it with the plan distribution of the target environment. In subsequent cycles, we incorporate plan-level quality signals obtained from execution and valida-tion. These signals are used to construct preference pairs of higher- and lower-scoring plans, which are then used for DPO fine-tuning. This allows the model to internalize the agent’s feedback and gradually improve plan generation. In our framework, DPO acts as a lightweight plan-selection bias rather than a precise credit as-signment mechanism. It increases the probability of plan structures that the RL agent can learn from early, implicitly forming an automated curriculum, while deprioritizing plans that yield little initial progress without explicitly labeling them as incor-rect. 

5 Experiments 

In this section, we describe the experiments con-ducted to answer the following research questions (RQ): 

RQ1. (Effectiveness and Generalization of Auto-Generated Plans) : How well can the Su-perIgor agent learn to follow instructions by lever-aging LLM-generated plans, and how well does this learned behavior generalize to new instruc-tions? We measure effectiveness as the agent’s final success rate on training tasks (Atomic and Combo splits). We measure generalization using final success rates on two test sets: Paraphrases (same goals, new wording) and New Objects (new goal combinations). 

RQ2. (Policy Training under Sparse Feed-back) : How well can the SuperIgor policy model be trained to follow plans under sparse feedback? The primary metric for this is the final SR on the training tasks. 

RQ3. (Agent Effectiveness with Iterative Su-perIgor Cycles) : How does the agent’s perfor-mance evolve over multiple iterations of the Su-perIgor planning-training cycle? 5.1 Environment 

We conduct our experiments on the CrafText bench-mark (Volovikova et al., 2025), which provides a unified testbed for evaluating instruction-following agents in a multimodal, dynamic, and partially ob-servable open-ended environment. Leveraging the modular design of CrafText, which allows for the procedural generation of custom tasks, we con-struct a specialized dataset named FOCUS .The FOCUS dataset is built upon CrafText’s Achievement scenarios but is specifically engi-neered to rigorously test instruction adherence un-der strict constraints. It contains over 900 instruc-tions with a vocabulary of more than 1,500 unique words. The training set is composed of two instruc-tion types: Atomic , which specify a single, indi-visible goal (e.g., “craft a furnace”), and Combo ,which combine multiple atomic goals into a se-quence of actions (e.g., “craft a furnace and then collect wood”). A critical challenge in this domain is that task composition often involves overlapping subtasks. For example, crafting a furnace first requires mak-ing a wooden pickaxe and collecting stone — steps that are also required for other goals. Consequently, agents may learn generic subroutines that maxi-mize reward without truly grounding the linguistic instruction. To address this, FOCUS enforces a 

strict evaluation protocol : an instruction is consid-ered successful only if all its specified goals are completed precisely as requested, with no extra-neous achievements triggered. This prevents the agent from exploiting broad, non-specific strate-gies. To evaluate generalization, FOCUS employs two distinct test sets. The Paraphrases set consists of Combo instructions from the training set refor-mulated with novel vocabulary and syntax. The 

New Objects set introduces new combinations of Atomic goals that appeared during training but never occurred together in a single instruction. This structure allows FOCUS to assess both robustness to linguistic variation and compositional general-ization. 

5.2 Experiments Setup 

In our pipeline, we generate plans using Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct 2, fine-tune it for one epoch with DPO ( β = 0.5, lr = 1 × 10 −5 ) to stabilize lo-

> 2https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2. 5-14B-Instruct

cal updates, and then train policies with PPO-T (lr = 0 .001 , ε = 0 .02 ) and Skill Curriculum Learn-ing for 2.5B steps. We validate by executing 10 plans across 50 seeds to assess robustness. Two full cycles were conducted, with evaluations before and after LLM fine-tuning, and results compared against baselines at 2.5B and 5B steps (Figure 3). Additional hyperparameters are described in more detail in Appendix J. 

5.3 Baselines 

For our comparative analysis, we use several es-tablished baselines from the original CrafText study (Volovikova et al., 2025). PPO-T (Text-Augmented PPO) augments PPO with textual grounding: instructions are encoded using a frozen DistilBERT [CLS] embedding, concatenated with CNN-based visual features, and processed by a GRU to maintain temporal context. PPO-T+ (Plan-Augmented PPO) extends this by first translating each instruction into a structured plan with GPT-4, and then providing the agent with a plan embedding instead of the raw instruction. FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) offers an alternative integration of language and vision. Here, instruc-tion embeddings generate parameters that modulate CNN outputs via Feature-wise Linear Modulation layers, allowing textual context to directly shape visual feature processing. To ensure consistency, all baselines follow a strict protocol requiring the DONE action to signal task completion, with success only counted when both the instruction is satisfied and DONE invoked. We also evaluate an Auto-DONE (Soft-) variant, where episodes terminate automatically upon com-pletion, and include an Oracle agent trained with PPO-T and Skill Curriculum Learning on human-written ground-truth plans. 

5.4 Experimental Results RQ1. Effectiveness and Generalization of Auto-Generated Plans in the SuperIgor Pipeline a) Auto-generated plans train agents far more effectively than instruction-only baselines. 

On Atomic tasks (Figure 3(a)), SuperIgor agent reach 0.34 –0.44 , compared to only 0.10 –0.19 for instruction-only RL baselines. Oracle remains higher at 0.56 –0.65 , but the SuperIgor → Oracle gap ( ≈ 0.20 ) is much smaller than the Baselines →

SuperIgor gap ( ≈ 0.25 –0.30 ), clearly showing the value of plan supervision. On Combo tasks (Fig-ure 3(b)), SuperIgor achieves 0.21 , outperforming Figure 3: Comparison of SuperIgor and baseline performance on CrafText tasks (Atomic / Combo / New Objects / Paraphrases). All agents were evaluated at 2.5 billion steps (corresponding to the first cycle in the SuperIgor approach) and 5 billion steps (corresponding to the second cycle). 

baselines at 0.08 , while Oracle reaches 0.43 . The wider gap to Oracle here can be explained by the fact that SI agents must simultaneously learn up to 20 alternative plans, whereas Oracle is trained on a single expert-aligned plan, which simplifies optimization. We further compare against standalone LLM-based agents (Appendix B.1) and observe that they fail to handle compositional instructions, with performance dropping sharply on Combo tasks. This highlights the importance of environment-grounded learning for effective long-horizon in-struction following. 

b) Agents trained with auto-generated plans generalize on unseen goals better than those trained with Oracle plans. 

On Combo tasks, Oracle achieves 0.43 , while SuperIgor reaches 0.21 . But on New Object tasks (Figure 3 (c) ), Oracle drops sharply to ≈ 0.22 ,while SI decreases more moderately to 0.12 –0.17 .Thus, although SI lags in absolute terms, its perfor-mance is more stable: the Oracle–SI gap shrinks from 0.25 on Combo to only 0.05 –0.10 on New Object tasks. We attribute this stronger generaliza-tion precisely to the fact that SI agents learn from multiple alternative plans per instruction, which exposes them to richer variability during training. 

c) Agents trained with auto-generated plans do not lose performance when instructions are paraphrased. 

Paraphrases reuse (Figure 3 (d)) the same goals as in Combo tasks but are expressed in different linguistic forms. In Cycle 1, SI achieves 0.07 on Combo and 0.09 on Paraphrases. In Cycle 2, SI remains stable, with 0.21 on Combo and 0.20 on Paraphrases. This shows that SuperIgor agents can successfully transfer their learned strategies to differently worded instructions, maintaining perfor-mance even when the language of the goal changes. 

RQ2. Policy Training under Sparse Feedback a) Skill Curriculum Learning significantly im-proves subtask acquisition under sparse feed-back, compared to unstructured training 

We evaluate the training process by the num-ber of unique subtasks the agent masters over time. A subtask is considered "mastered" once its suc-cess rate surpasses a 70% threshold. This metric provides a clearer insight into the agent’s growing capabilities and its ability to handle compositional tasks. We compare three configurations, with the results visualized in Figure 4. The agent trained with Skill Curriculum on Oracle Plans sets a practical upper bound for per-formance. By the 10 billion step mark, it success-fully masters 14 distinct subtasks . It signifies that the agent has acquired almost the entire ’mining’ technology tree: all the achievements from col-lecting wood to collecting iron. Furthermore, it demonstrates the ability to execute complex, com-bined instructions that require interleaving subtasks from different progression branches, such as eating, drinking, and collecting resources within a single, coherent plan. Agent trained on Oracle plans without the Skill Curriculum perform worse with only mastered 5basic subtasks . Even with a flawless plan, the agent fails to learn without a structured progres-sion that allows it to build foundational skills first. This finding confirms that Skill Curriculum helps to overcome sparse feedback problem and enables agent abilities to learn more subtasks. 

b) Plan quality is critical for effective learning under sparse feedback 

While curriculum learning is necessary for train-ing under sparse rewards, its effectiveness strongly depends on the quality of the underlying plans. High-quality plans constrain the search space and provide a meaningful structure for skill acquisition, whereas poor plans can make learning intractable even with a well-designed curriculum. Skill Curriculum with SI-Initial plans closely fol-lows the Oracle trajectory, mastering 12 subtasks 

within the same timeframe (compared to 14 with Oracle plans). This shows that plans generated by Qwen-14B-Instruct are a strong approximation to expert-designed ones and are sufficient to unlock most of the agent’s learning potential. However, we observe that this performance is highly sensitive to the underlying language model used for plan generation; a detailed analysis is pro-vided in Appendix B.3 and Appendix B.4. When the initial plans are of lower quality, the curriculum alone is insufficient to overcome the sparse reward setting, and the agent fails to learn effectively. 

RQ3. Agent Effectiveness with Iterative Su-perIgor Cycles a) Plan-following quality improves across cy-cles. On Atomic tasks (training, Figure 3, (a)), SI-DPO increases from 0.34 in Cycle 1 to 0.43 in Cycle 2. On Combo tasks (training, Figure 3, (b)), SI-DPO grows from 0.06 in Cycle 1 to ≈ 0.21 in Cycle 2. On New Object tasks (testing, Figure 3, (c)), SI-DPO declines only slightly from ≈ 0.21 

to 0.12 –0.17 , showing that performance improves with additional SuperIgor cycles on both training 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

> Environment Steps (in billions)
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> Number of Mastered Skills
> Oracle Plans,
> Skill Curriculum
> SI-Initial plans,
> Skill Curriculum
> Oracle plans,
> No Skill Curriculum

Figure 4: A comparative analysis of the number of mastered subtasks over 10 billion environment steps. 

and testing setups and remains relatively stable when moving to unseen goals. 

b) Plan reprioritization under DPO illustrates the process by which language models are incre-mentally grounded in the agent’s behavior and the underlying environment mechanics. . The re-ranking visualization (Appendix E, Figure 9) shows how plans shift across SFT, DPO-C1, and DPO-C2. Success Rates range from 0.68 to 0.86 . A plan with SR = 0 .86 steadily climbs to the top across cycles, while weaker plans with SR ≈ 0.68 remain con-sistently at the bottom. These changes are gradual rather than abrupt, suggesting that DPO provides a soft grounding signal that progressively aligns plan priorities with the agent’s execution success. This interpretation is further supported by the abla-tion study (Section 6), which shows that integrating DPO accelerates agent learning in the second cycle, indicating that gradual plan re-prioritization trans-lates into more effective behavioral grounding. We also compare DPO with GRPO (Appendix B.5) and observe that reward-based optimization is less ef-fective in this setting, likely due to its sensitivity to reward scale variability across instructions, making it less aligned with the plan ranking objective. 

6 Ablation Study 

6.1 Component Interaction Ablation 

To quantify the contribution of each module of the SuperIgor framework, we conduct an ablation study in which individual components are removed from the training pipeline. We evaluate the influ-ence of four factors: ( 1) Ontology-Based Training Plan Generation, ( 2) Curriculum design in the RL stage, ( 3) LLM plan-model pretraining (SFT), and (4) DPO finetuning based on RL agent performance signals. Table 1 presents the results of this exper-iment, where we measure the SuperIgor agent’s Table 1: Ablation study of the SuperIgor framework, measuring agent SuccessRate on the Atom subset of the CrafText dataset across two training cycles                               

> Ontology Curriculum DPO SFT Cycle-1 Cycle-2
> ✗✓✓✓0.06 N/A
> ✓✗✓✓0.08 N/A
> ✓✓✗✓0.34 0.39
> ✓✓✓✗0.25 0.13
> ✓✓✓✓0.35 0.45

SuccessRate on the Atom subset of the CrafText in-struction dataset. The analysis of the results yields two central findings. 

(1) Curriculum is effective only when paired with high-quality, ontology-structured plans. Al-though full-cycle results may suggest that gains are driven by curriculum learning, the ablation shows that curriculum is effective only when com-bined with ontology-guided plan generation. With-out ontology—i.e., without structured, hierarchical plans—the curriculum lacks a meaningful ordering signal and fails to improve performance (Cycle-

1: 0.06 ). In contrast, ontology-based plans en-code a natural hierarchy of goals, enabling a prin-cipled progression from simple to complex tasks. This alignment between plan structure and staged learning makes the curriculum operative, increas-ing Cycle-1 performance from 0.06 to 0.35 .

(2) DPO improves the RL agent by learning to prioritize plans that lead to higher-quality be-havior. Unlike SFT, which is trained to reproduce the ontology-induced distribution of plans, DPO directly leverages RL performance as a preference signal: it learns to rank plans higher when they empirically yield better agent behavior. Removing DPO results in weaker prioritization: the RL agent reaches only 0.39 in Cycle-2 without DPO, com-pared to 0.45 when DPO is included. Thus, DPO systematically shifts the plan distribution toward behaviorally effective plans, accelerating and am-plifying the RL agent’s improvement across cycles. 

6.2 Compute-Matched Ablations 

To isolate the effect of planner adaptation from pure policy optimization, we conduct compute-matched ablations where PPO training is extended up to 15B environment steps while keeping the planner fixed (no DPO). We observe that the Success Rate improves during early training (0.26 → 0.32 at 5B steps) but saturates thereafter, stabilizing around 0.30–0.31 despite a 3 × increase in compute. This indicates that scaling the policy alone is insufficient to overcome the limitations imposed by a fixed plan distribution, consistent with the sparse-reward challenges discussed in Section 3. We further compare three compute-matched vari-ants at 5B steps: (i) no DPO with longer training, (ii) no DPO with reward-based plan filtering, and (iii) the full SuperIgor pipeline with DPO. While filtering improves training performance (0.30 →

0.34), it degrades generalization on New Objects (0.11 → 0.10), suggesting overfitting to a nar-rower plan subset. In contrast, SuperIgor (SI-DPO) improves both training (0.36) and general-ization (0.17), demonstrating that iterative planner updates align the plan distribution with the pol-icy’s learning dynamics. These results confirm that performance gains arise from planner–policy co-adaptation rather than increased RL compute alone.         

> Table 2: Compute-matched comparison of static and adaptive planner variants.
> Model Train Combo Test New Objects No DPO, longer training 0.30 0.11 No DPO, reward filtering 0.34 0.10 SuperIgor (SI-DPO) 0.36 0.17

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced SuperIgor, a frame-work for training agents to follow complex natural-language instructions in dynamic multimodal en-vironments. It combines language-model-based planning with reinforcement learning, enabling ef-fective instruction-following without predefined subtasks or explicit subgoal verification. Ontology-based plan generation provides structure, support-ing both Skill Curriculum Learning for sparse re-wards and cyclic DPO-based adaptation to priori-tize effective plans. Together, these components al-low SuperIgor to outperform instruction-only base-lines, achieve near-Oracle generalization on out-of-distribution tasks, and remain robust to instruction paraphrasing. Limitations 

While SuperIgor demonstrates a scalable approach to integrating language-model-based planning with reinforcement learning, it has several limitations. First, the method depends on the quality of the ini-tial plan structure induced by the language model. The ontology graph is generated fully automati-cally, without human supervision, which may lead to redundant, inconsistent, or cyclic dependencies between subtasks. In practice, we mitigate this is-sue empirically by evaluating different language models and selecting those that produce stable and coherent plan graphs (Appendix B.4); our experi-ments show that several mid-sized models already perform well in this setting.Nevertheless, robust-ness to poorly structured plan spaces remains a limitation of the current approach. In addition, the interaction between plan qual-ity and policy learning is not always interpretable. While our validation protocol provides a clear rel-ative preference signal between candidate plans for the same instruction (via repeated evaluation across seeds), it can still be difficult to diagnose training failures at the system level. In particu-lar, when learning stalls, it is unclear whether the bottleneck is caused by limitations of the current policy optimization and exploration dynamics or by systematic issues in the generated plan space (e.g., missing prerequisites or overly difficult de-compositions). 

References 

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. 2022. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watch-ing unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:24639–24654. Adrian Bolton, Alexander Lerchner, Alexandra Cordell, Alexandre Moufarek, Andrew Bolt, Andrew Lampinen, Anna Mitenkova, Arne Olav Hallingstad, Bojan Vujatovic, Bonnie Li, et al. 2025. Sima 2: A generalist embodied agent for virtual worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04797 .Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia, Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Babyai: A plat-form to study the sample efficiency of grounded lan-guage learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08272 .Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. 2022. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:18343– 18362. Jonathan Gray, Kavya Srinet, Yacine Jernite, Hao-nan Yu, Zhuoyuan Chen, Demi Guo, Siddharth Goyal, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Arthur Szlam. 2019. Craftassist: A framework for dialogue-enabled inter-active agents. Dongge Han, Trevor McInroe, Adam Jelley, Stefano V. Albrecht, Peter Bell, and Amos Storkey. 2025. LLM-personalize: Aligning LLM planners with human preferences via reinforced self-training for house-keeping robots. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 1465–1474, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. Austin W. Hanjie, Victor Zhong, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2021. Grounding language to entities and dynamics for generalization in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 4051–4062. PMLR. Felix Hill, Olivier Tieleman, Tamara von Glehn, Nathaniel Wong, Hamza Merzic, and Stephen Clark. 2021. Grounded language learning fast and slow. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. 2022. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for em-bodied agents. In International conference on ma-chine learning , page 9118–9147. PMLR. Brian Ichter, Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, et al. 2023. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding lan-guage in robotic affordances. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 205 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 287–318. PMLR. Peter Jansen. 2020. Visually-grounded planning with-out vision: Language models infer detailed plans from high-level instructions. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 ,pages 4412–4417, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Muyao Li, Zihao Wang, Kaichen He, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. 2025. JARVIS-VLA: Post-training large-scale vision language models to play visual games with keyboards and mouse. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 17878–17899, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Shalev Lifshitz, Keiran Paster, Harris Chan, Jimmy Ba, and Sheila McIlraith. 2023. Steve-1: A generative model for text-to-behavior in minecraft. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:69900– 69929. Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan. 2024. Learning to model the world with language. In Pro-ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 29992–30017. PMLR. Lajanugen Logeswaran, Yao Fu, Moontae Lee, and Honglak Lee. 2022. Few-shot subgoal planning with language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies , pages 5493–5506. Aryan Mathur and Asaduddin Ahmed. 2025. Adapting interleaved encoders with ppo for language-guided reinforcement learning in babyai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23148 .Fabian Paischer, Thomas Adler, Markus Hofmarcher, and Sepp Hochreiter. 2023. Semantic helm: Ahuman-readable memory for reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. 2018. Film: Vi-sual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-telligence , volume 32. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741. Manolis Savva, Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Ba-tra, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain, Julian Straub, Jia Liu, and Vladlen Koltun. 2019. Habitat: A platform for embodied AI research. In 2019 IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South), October 27 - November 2, 2019 , pages 9338–9346. IEEE. Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. 2020. Alfred: A bench-mark for interpreting grounded instructions for ev-eryday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 10740–10749. Alessandro Suglia, Qiaozi Gao, Jesse Thomason, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav S. Sukhatme. 2021. Em-bodied bert: A transformer model for embodied, language-guided visual task completion. In EMNLP 2021 Workshop on Novel Ideas in Learning-to-Learn through Interaction .Weihao Tan, Wentao Zhang, Shanqi Liu, Longtao Zheng, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. 2024. True knowl-edge comes from practice: Aligning large language models with embodied environments via reinforce-ment learning. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Zoya Volovikova, Gregory Gorbov, Petr Kuderov, Alek-sandr Panov, and Alexey Skrynnik. 2025. CrafText benchmark: Advancing instruction following in com-plex multimodal open-ended world. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 26131–26151, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zoya Volovikova, Alexey Skrynnik, Petr Kuderov, and Aleksandr I. Panov. 2024. Instruction following with goal-conditioned reinforcement learning in virtual environments. In Proceedings of ECAI 2024, the 27th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 392 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications , pages 650–657. IOS Press. Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xi-aojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. 2023. Describe, explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with llms en-ables open-world multi-task agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Lewei Yao, Jianhua Han, Youpeng Wen, Xiaodan Liang, Dan Xu, Wei Zhang, Zhenguo Li, Chunjing Xu, and Hang Xu. 2022. Detclip: Dictionary-enriched visual-concept paralleled pre-training for open-world detec-tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:9125–9138. Victor Zhong, Austin W. Hanjie, Sida I. Wang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2021. Silg: The multi-environment symbolic interactive language grounding benchmark. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 21505– 21519. Victor Zhong, Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefen-stette. 2020. Rtfm: Generalising to new environment dynamics via reading. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Enshen Zhou, Yiran Qin, Zhenfei Yin, Yuzhou Huang, Ruimao Zhang, Lu Sheng, Yu Qiao, and Jing Shao. 2024. Minedreamer: Learning to follow instructions via chain-of-imagination for simulated-world control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12037 .Zhiyuan Zhou, Pranav Atreya, Abraham Lee, Homer Rich Walke, Oier Mees, and Sergey Levine. 2025. Autonomous improvement of instruction fol-lowing skills via foundation models. In Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 4805–4825. PMLR. A Plans Generation:candidates generation 

In our plan extraction method the goal is to elicit the model’s hypotheses about the dependencies be-tween subtasks in the environment. In the first step we construct a subtask bank B, i.e., the set of all candidate subtasks derived from the instruction set. For each instruction I ∈ D , we prompt the lan-guage model fLLM to generate a goals plan P[I],i.e., the set of goal subtasks directly required by the instruction. The model is provided with the current contents of the subtask bank B, which encourages reuse of already known subtasks and reduces the introduction of redundant synonyms. If the gener-ated goals contain subtasks not yet present in B,they are added. At the initial iteration the bank is empty, so all subtasks generated by the model are included. The complete process is summarized in Algorithm 2. Once a sufficiently rich subtask bank B has been established, ontological dependencies between sub-tasks are extracted. For each target subtask t ∈ B,the language model is queried multiple times to de-termine which elements from B are required for the completion of t. For every candidate dependency 

(r → t), its probability is estimated as 

P (r → t) = kt

N ,

where kt denotes the number of times subtask r

was identified as necessary for t and N is the num-ber of queries. To filter out spurious associations, the Wilson confidence interval is applied to the re-sulting probabilities. The procedure is carried out in two passes: first over the entire bank B, and then restricted to the subtasks previously identified as relevant, which refines the weighting of relations. The final output is an ontology graph G = ( V, E )

that encodes the model’s hypothesized structure of interrelations among subtasks. The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 3. After constructing the ontology G = ( V, E ),each goal plan P[I] is expanded with its dependen-cies. For every subtask s ∈ P [I], we recursively collect all prerequisites in G. The union of these subtasks with the original goals defines the plan’s vertices, which are then topologically sorted so that prerequisites precede dependents. The result is a linearized plan P containing the goals and all supporting subtasks (Algorithm 4). 

Algorithm 2 Subtask Bank Update                                            

> Require: Instruction stream D, language model fLLM
> Ensure: Subtask bank B, goals plans P
> 1: Initialize subtask bank B← ∅
> 2: Initialize goals plans P ← ∅
> 3: for each instruction I∈ D do
> 4: Identify goal subtasks conditioned on B:
> S←fLLM (I, B )
> 5: for each subtask s∈Sdo
> 6: if s / ∈Bthen
> 7: B←B∪ { s}
> 8: end if
> 9: end for
> 10: Goals plan for I:P[I]←S
> 11: end for
> 12: return B, P

Algorithm 3 Ontology Construction                                                                                            

> Require: Subtask bank B, language model fLLM , queries per pass N, threshold τ
> Ensure: Ontology graph G= ( V, E )
> 1: Initialize counts count (r, t )←0for all r, t ∈B, r ̸=t
> 2: for each target subtask t∈Bdo
> 3: for two passes do
> 4: Define candidate set C:
> C←
> (
> B\ { t},pass 1
> {r∈B:count (r, t )>0},pass 2 5: for i= 1 . . . N do
> 6: Query prerequisites:
> R←fLLM (t, C )
> 7: for each r∈Rdo
> 8: count (r, t )←count (r, t ) + 1
> 9: end for
> 10: end for
> 11: end for
> 12: end for
> 13: Initialize edge set E← ∅
> 14: for each pair (r, t )do
> 15: Compute probability:
> ˆp(r→t) = count (r, t )
> N
> 16: Compute Wilson lower bound LB (ˆ p, N )
> 17: if LB ≥τthen
> 18: E←E∪ { (r→t)}
> 19: end if
> 20: end for
> 21: return G= ( V=B, E )Figure 5: Training plans generation

Algorithm 4 Final Plan Generation from Ontology 

Require: Instruction I, goals mapping G, goals plan P, ontology G = ( V, E )

Ensure: Final plan P 

> 1:

Retrieve goal subtasks: S ← G [I] 

> 2:

Initialize plan vertex set: U ← S 

> 3:

for each s ∈ S do  

> 4:

Expand prerequisites via ontology: 

D ← PREREQ CLOSURE (s, G ) 

> 5:

U ← U ∪ D 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Extract induced subgraph: GU ← G[U ] 

> 8:

Topologically sort GU to obtain ordered plan 

P 

> 9:

return P

B Additional Experiments 

B.1 SuperIgor vs. SOTA LLMs 

> Table 3: Model performance comparison

Model Atom Combo SI_pixel (Cycle 1) 0.56 0.23 Claude Sonnet 4.6 0.24 0.05 OpenAI GPT-4.1 0.14 0.04 Qwen/QWQ-32B 0.22 0.03 Gemma-27B 0.06 0.02 We additionally evaluate standalone LLM-based agents under the same Atom and Combo settings (Table 3). While several models achieve moderate performance on atomic tasks, all of them exhibit a sharp degradation on compositional instructions, with success rates dropping close to zero in the 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0      

> Environment steps 1e10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> Evaluation score
> sr=0.5
> sr=0.6
> sr=0.7
> sr=0.8
> sr=0.9 Figure 6: Ablation of the skill-mastery threshold τ. The plot shows evaluation scores on the Atomic and Combo tasks during training for different τvalues.

Combo setting. This trend holds even for reasoning-oriented models such as QWQ-32B, indicating that improvements in single-step reasoning do not di-rectly translate to effective long-horizon planning. In contrast, the RL-trained SuperIgor agent main-tains substantially higher performance and de-grades more gracefully under composition. These results suggest that purely LLM-based approaches struggle with compositional planning and long-horizon credit assignment, consistent with obser-vations in CrafText and related embodied bench-marks . We also observe sensitivity of LLM agents to prompt design and observation encoding, further limiting their stability and reproducibility. Over-all, this comparison highlights the necessity of environment-grounded learning for reliable instruc-tion following in complex settings. 

B.2 Ablation Study: Skill Mastery Threshold 

We conducted an ablation study to analyze the sen-sitivity of the Skill Curriculum Learning to the mas-tery threshold parameter τ . Figure 6 presents the final performance of the Skill Curriculum Learn-ing agent after 10 billion environment steps in CrafText-Symbolic configuration for different val-ues of τ ranging from 0.5 to 0.9.The results demonstrate that τ = 0 .7 provides an optimal balance for curriculum progression. We hypothesize that lower thresholds ( τ = 0 .5) allow the agent to progress too quickly to complex skills before achieving reliable proficiency, while higher thresholds ( τ = 0 .9) cause the agent to spend ex-cessive time perfecting basic skills, slowing overall learning. The τ = 0 .7 value strikes an optimal balance between progression speed and skill relia-bility. 

B.3 Analysis of Ontology Quality 

We investigate how the quality of subtask extrac-tion affects downstream performance. In particular, we focus on three factors: (i) oversampling of re-dundant or synonymous subtasks ( Oversampling ), (ii) missing core subtasks ( Missing Skills ), and (iii) the presence of spurious (non-classified) subtasks (Spurious Skills ). To evaluate this, we construct a reference set by sampling ∼50 validation instruc-tions and manually annotating their core subtasks, resulting in 23 unique skills. Generated subtasks are matched against this set using cosine similar-ity, and we compute the corresponding metrics. Coverage results are shown in Figure 7, while the remaining metrics are summarized in Table 4. We observe a clear relationship between ontol-ogy quality and downstream performance. As shown in Figure 7, models with higher coverage recover a larger fraction of the reference subtask set. At the same time, Table 4 shows that low-performing models tend to exhibit higher oversam-pling and a larger number of missing and spurious subtasks. In particular, oversampling leads to an inflated and ambiguous subtask space, while missing skills result in incomplete plans that cannot be reliably ex-ecuted. In contrast, structural issues such as cyclic dependencies, while undesirable, can be mitigated algorithmically (e.g., via cycle detection and prun-ing) and appear less critical in practice. Overall, these results indicate that downstream performance is primarily driven by the precision and completeness of subtask extraction, highlight-ing the importance of controlling subtask granular-ity and redundancy for stable and effective training.                   

> Table 4: Ontology quality metrics across LLMs (lower is better): Over. – oversampling, Missing – missing skills, Spurious – non-classified skills.
> Model Over. ↓Missing ↓Spurious ↓
> Qwen 121CodeGemma 153Phi-4 25 86Mistral 59 29

B.4 Ablation Study: Choice of LLM for Ontology and Training-Plan Generation 

To understand how the choice of language model affects the quality of the ontology and the generated training plans we conducted an ablation study com-paring several families of LLMs. For each model, Figure 7: Coverage of reference subtasks (out of 23) across different LLMs. Higher is better. 

we regenerated both the ontology and the full train-ing dataset (plans), and then trained an RL agent using our Skill Curriculum Learning procedure. Table 5 reports the agent’s success rate on the training split under different planner mod-els. The experiment includes models from the Qwen and Gemma families, as well as the larger 

microsoft/NextCoder-32B model. 

(1) Larger models do not necessarily produce better ontologies or plans. Although one may ex-pect the largest models to generate the most struc-tured plans, but NextCoder-32B performance is surpassed by significantly smaller Qwen models. Qwen-32B yields the highest performance (0.43), and even Qwen-7B outperforms Gemma-12B, indi-cating that model family and training specialization matter more than raw parameter count. 

(2) Qwen models produce more stable and se-mantically consistent plan structures. Models from the Qwen family demonstrate higher robust-ness in generating hierarchical task decompositions that align with our ontology constraints. This leads to more reliable curriculum construction and more effective RL training. 

(3) Some widely used LLMs fail to benefit from the alignment stage. We also conducted ex-periments with several other well-known models, including microsoft/phi-4 , mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 , and openai/gpt-oss-20b , and found that the alignment stage does not provide any mea-surable benefit for them. Despite explicit prompt constraints on which subtasks should be used, these models tend to generate large numbers of synony-mously similar subtasks. Consequently, the set of goals that the agent must recover becomes even 

> Figure 8: Example of instructions and corresponding plans

larger than when instructions are provided directly, rendering it impractical to run the full pipeline with these models. 

B.5 DPO vs. GRPO for Planner Fine-Tuning 

We additionally compare DPO and GRPO as al-ternative methods for planner fine-tuning. While GRPO and PPO are in principle applicable to this setting, recent work suggests that GRPO can pro-vide a stronger and more stable optimization signal for reward-based language model training. To eval-uate whether this also holds in our setup, we replace DPO with GRPO in the planner fine-tuning stage and measure downstream policy performance on the validation split. Results are reported in Table 6. We find that DPO achieves better performance than GRPO in our setting, improving success rate from 0.18 to 0.21 while also reducing the number of unsolved instructions from 175 to 166. We at-tribute this to the structure of the planner objective: although dense execution scores are available, the Table 5: Ablation on the choice of LLM used for generating both ontology and training plans. We report success rate on the training set.           

> LLM Qwen1.5-32B NextCoder-32B Qwen1.5-14B Gemma-12B Qwen-7B
> SR (Train) 0.43 0.26 0.35 0.14 0.22

planner is not required to optimize absolute reward values directly, but rather to rank alternative plans for the same instruction. Since reward magnitudes may vary substantially across instructions, direct re-ward optimization is less well aligned with this goal. In contrast, DPO explicitly optimizes pairwise pref-erences, which better matches the plan-selection problem considered in our framework.           

> Table 6: Comparison of planner fine-tuning methods on the validation split. Higher SR is better; lower unsolved count is better.
> Model SR ↑Unsolved ↓
> Original (pretrained) 0.11 234 DPO 0.21 166 GRPO 0.18 175

C CrafText 

To provide a concrete example of our method, Fig-ure 8 visualizes the agent’s state at a single timestep. The CrafText environment, shown on the left, is a dynamic grid-world where the agent must gather resources, craft items, and navigate diverse terrains to survive and complete tasks. The core of our approach lies in the hierarchi-cal decomposition of complex goals. As shown on the right, a high-level instruction, which may be ambiguous or require long-term planning (e.g., "Craft an iron pickaxe."), is first translated into a deterministic, multi-step plan. Each step in this plan constitutes a distinct subtask. Crucially, the agent’s policy is not conditioned on the entire plan. Instead, it focuses solely on the currently active subtask. This transforms a chal-lenging long-horizon problem into a more tractable sequence of short-horizon tasks. The agent’s objec-tive at any moment is to complete the highlighted subtask and then invoke the DONE action. For ex-ample, optimal agent can choose DONE action based on the inventory state (when completing subtasks such as collecting resources and crafting items), player status (for subtasks that are related to eating, drinking or sleeping) or map state (for subtasks such as placing blocks). Upon successful completion, the framework pro-vides the next subtask in the sequence, guiding the agent through the overall plan until the final goal is achieved. We utilize the FOCUS instruction dataset de-scribed in the main text. The structure of the dataset is as follows: Training Set: • Atomic: Single, indivisible goals (e.g., "Craft a furnace"). • Combo: Sequences of multiple atomic goals (e.g., "Craft a furnace and then collect wood"). • Crucially, each instruction in the training set also has a paraphrased version to encourage linguistic robustness from the start. Test Sets (Out-of-Distribution): • Paraphrases: Contains the same underlying goals as the Combo training set, but expressed with novel vocabulary and syntax. This tests robustness to linguistic variation. 

– Training Combo: "Consume beef and create a stone pickaxe." 

– Test Paraphrase: "Eat steak and forge a stone pickaxe." or "Devour cow meat and create a stone pickaxe." • New Objects: Introduces new combinations of atomic goals that appeared during training but never occurred together in a single instruction in the training set. This directly tests composi-tional generalization. These instructions also come with their own paraphrases. • Training contained: "Consume beef" and "Forge a stone pickaxe" and "Forge a stone blade" as separate atomic or part of other com-bos. • Test New Object: "Consume beef and forge a stone blade." or "Eat cow meat and create a sword from stone." This structure allows us to rigorously dissect the agent’s capabilities: learning from language (Atomic/Combo), generalizing to new phrasing (Paraphrases), and generalizing to new goal combi-nations (New Objects). 

D Complete SuperIgor Training Pipeline 

The SuperIgor framework integrates multiple com-ponents that exchange specific inputs and outputs during training. Below we describe the key data flows between components: 

Component Interfaces: 

• LLM Planner ( fLLM )– Input: Instruction I

– Output: Candidate plan P consisting of a sequence of subtasks from subtask bank B

• RL Policy ( πθ)– Input: Environment observations ot, cur-rent plan step DistilBERT [CLS] embed-ding pϕ(t) of a plan P

– Output: Action at from extended action space containing default Craftext actions and additional DONE action that gives the agent the next plan step embedding 

pϕ(t+1) of a plan P

The complete training procedure integrating all components is summarized in Algorithm 5 

E DPO plans reprioritization 

Figure 9: Example of DPO plan reprioritization for the instruction: "Forge a stone pickaxe and mine coal" 

Algorithm 5 Complete SuperIgor Training Pipeline 

Require: 

1: Environment E

2: Instruction dataset Dtrain = {I1, I 2, . . . , I N }

3: Initial LLM planner fLLM with parameters θLLM 

4: Initial RL policy πθ with parameters θRL 

5: Mastery threshold τ , number of cycles C

Ensure: 

6: Optimized planner f ∗

> LLM

7: Trained policy π∗

> θ

8: 9: Initialize subtask bank B ← ∅ 

10: Initialize candidate plans P ← {} 

11: Initialize mastered subtasks M ← ∅ 

12: 13: Initial Plan Generation (Cycle 1): 

14: Extract subtasks: S ← fLLM (Dtrain )

15: Build ontology: O ← BuildOntology (S, f LLM )

16: Generate initial plans: Pinitial ← ExpandPlans (Dtrain , O)

17: 18: Fine-tune fLLM on Pinitial using SFT 19: Generate training plans: P ← fLLM (Dtrain )

20: 21: for cycle c = 1 to C do 

22: 23: Policy Training with Skill Curriculum: 

24: Train πθ on P using PPO with Skill Curriculum Learn-ing 25: Update mastered subtasks M based on success rates 26: 27: Plan Validation: 

28: Execute πθ with plans P for multiple seeds 29: For every plan P in compute average success rate 

SR (p)

30: Construct preference dataset Dpref 

31: 32: LLM Fine-tuning: 

33: Fine-tune fLLM on Dpref using DPO 34: 35: Plan Generation: 

36: Select plans for new training epoch: 37: P ← SelectPlans (fLLM , Dtrain , P)

38: end for 

39: 40: return fLLM , π θ

F Training Details: Policy Optimization 

Our low-level policy, which is responsible for exe-cuting individual subtasks, is trained using Proxi-mal Policy Optimization (PPO). The agent’s goal at this stage is to learn an optimal strategy for complet-ing a given subtask based on its visual observations. The standard clipped surrogate objective for PPO is defined as: 

LPPO (θ) = Et

h

min( ρt(θ) ˆAt, clip (ρt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt)

i

,

where ρt(θ) = πθ (at|ot)  

> πθold (at|ot)

is the probability ratio and ˆAt is the estimated advantage at timestep t.Table 7: Comparison of computational cost and performance across methods.                   

> Method RL Training (5B steps) LLM Costs (2 cycles) Total Cost Atomic SR PPO-T (Baseline) ∼120h 0h ∼120h 0.03 FiLM (Baseline) ∼120h 0h ∼120h 0.06 SuperIgor / SI-DPO ∼120h ∼32h ∼152h 0.44 ±0.02

Our agent’s policy and value functions are pa-rameterized by a single neural network with a shared multimodal feature extractor and separate actor and critic heads. The visual stream processes the 63 × 63 pixel image with 3 channels observa-tions using a three-layer Convolutional Neural Net-work (CNN). Each convolutional layer utilizes 32 filters with a 5 × 5 kernel, followed by a ReLU ac-tivation and max-pooling. For the language stream, textual instructions are encoded using a pre-trained BERT model ( bert-base-uncased ), and we use the embedding of the [CLS] token as the final text representation. The flattened output of the CNN and the text embedding are then concatenated to form a unified multimodal representation. This combined feature vector is fed into two separate feed-forward net-works: the actor head , which outputs the logits for the categorical action distribution, and the critic head , which outputs a scalar estimate of the state-value function. 

G Training Details: LLM Fine-Tuning 

To improve the high-level planner (the LLM), we employ a reinforcement learning-based feedback loop. The planner generates a sequence of subtasks (a plan), which is then executed by the PPO agent. The final outcome of the agent’s execution (e.g., task success or failure, efficiency) serves as a signal to update the planner. 

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). This method aligns the model toward preferred comple-tions using pairwise preference data. The DPO loss is:                

> LDPO =−log σ β log π(x+|q)−log π(x−|q) ,

where x+ and x− are preferred and less pre-ferred plans for instruction q, and β is a tempera-ture parameter. 

H Agent’s plan following 

Figure 9 presents the example of how the agent follows the plan and chooses actions. For each sub-task, there are two frames: the first shows the obser-vation up to the moment when the agent takes the action that completes the subtask, along with the action distribution at that time; the second shows a few timesteps later, when the agent decides to skip the subtask in order to solve a new one. 

I Compute Resources 

All experiments were conducted on a high-performance computing cluster equipped with nodes containing 1 NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80 GB of VRAM. Each node was powered by an 12 CPU Cores CPU with 96 GB of system RAM. The total computational budget can be broken down into two primary stages: 

Policy Training and Evaluation. The primary computational cost stems from training the PPO agent. Each full training run for a single configura-tion up to 5 billion environment steps took approxi-mately 120 GPU-hours for all baselines including PPO-T, PPO-T+, FiLM and SI executor training. Reproducing all presented experiments, including the baseline comparisons and ablation studies, re-quired a total of 10 such training runs. 

LLM Training and Generation. The ini-tial generation of plans using the Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct model for the entire dataset required ap-proximately 1-2 GPU-hours on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. Epoch of finetuning LLM with DPO on evaluated plans takes approximately 15 GPU-hours. As shown in Table 7, incorporating LLM-based planning increases the total computational cost moderately, while yielding a substantial improve-ment in task success rate. 

J Training Details: Hyperparameters 

The hyperparameters for our experiments are de-tailed in Table 8. For the PPO agent training, we adopt the configuration from the original CrafText baseline study (Volovikova et al., 2025). For the LLM planner fine-tuning, we use a Q-LoRA ap-proach with a comprehensive set of parameters optimized for efficient large model training. Figure 10: Example of how the agent follows the plan and chooses actions. Table 8: Hyperparameters used for training the low-level agent and fine-tuning the high-level planner. 

Hyperparameter Value 

PPO Agent Training 

Learning rate 0.0002 Discount factor ( γ) 0.99 GAE lambda ( λ) 0.95 Clipping epsilon ( ϵ) 0.2 PPO epochs 4Number of minibatches 8Entropy coefficient 0.01 Value function coef. 0.5 Activation function Tanh Hidden layer size 512 

LLM Planner Fine-Tuning 

Base model Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct Training epochs 1Learning rate (SFT) 2e-4 Learning rate (DPO) 1e-5 Beta (DPO) 0.5 Optimizer Paged AdamW (32-bit) LR scheduler Cosine Warmup ratio 0.03 Batch size (per device) 16 Gradient accumulation 1Gradient clipping norm 0.3 Weight decay 0.001 Mixed precision bf16 

LoRA Configuration 

LoRA rank (r) 64 LoRA alpha ( α) 16 LoRA dropout 0.1 

Quantization (4-bit) 

Quantization type nf4 Compute dtype float16 K AI Assistants Usage 

AI assistants were used solely for language editing and text refinement. All scientific contributions and conclusions are the sole responsibility of the authors. 

L Plans Generation: Prompt for plan generation 

You control an agent in a 2D game with simplified Minecraft environment. You will need to provide a detailed step-by-step plan for following the user’s instructions. You must include all the preliminary steps that it needs to complete. You are controlling an agent in a 2D game set within a simplified Minecraft-like environment. The agent starts from scratch with an empty inventory and no gathered resources. Your task is to generate a step-by-step plan that enables the agent to follow a given user instruction. What you must do: - Break down the instruction into atomic actions the agent needs to perform. - Include all necessary preliminary steps, such as gathering or crafting resources. - Assume the agent has nothing at the beginning -- you must plan from the ground up. - Output your answer as a Python list of strings. - Each string must represent one atomic skill invocation, written on a separate line. Format for each step: "skill_name(arg1 = value1, arg2 = value2, ...)" - skill_name: the name of the primitive skill or action the agent will execute. - Inside the parentheses, list all required arguments with their names and corresponding values. Example: gather_resource(resource_type = wood) Each of the step agents will be implemented without knowledge of what it did before, so it can only rely on observation and the current step. Therefore, each step must be self-sufficient and not require knowledge of past steps. "If the instruction doesn’t specify what the agent needs to do and is more general--like ’Explore the world’ or ’Go out and examine the world around you’--send explore(object=world). In this case, the plan should consist of only one step: "explore(object=world)"." Send your answer as a python list. Instruction: Make a pickaxe from wood Answer: ["gather_resource(resource_type = wood)", "gather_resource(resource_type = wood)", "create_item(item_type = table)", "gather_resource(resource_type = wood)", "gather_resource(resource_type = wood)", "create_item(item_type = wooden_pickaxe)"] Send your answer as a python list. Instruction: $INSTRUCTION$ Answer: