Title: Resource-constrained Amazons chess decision framework integrating large language models and graph attention

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.10512v1

Published Time: Thu, 12 Mar 2026 00:46:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Resource-constrained Amazons chess decision framework integrating large language models and graph attention ⋆

Tianhao Qian a, Zhuoxuan Li a,b , Jinde Cao a, ∗, Xinli Shi c, Hanjie Liu a, Leszek Rutkowski b,d,e 

> a

School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China 

> b

Systems Research Institute of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw 01-447, Poland 

> c

School of Cyber Science & Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China  

> d

Institute of Computer Science, AGH University of Krakow, Kraków 30-059, Poland 

> e

SAN University, Łód´ z 90-113 , Poland 

Abstract 

Artificial intelligence has advanced significantly through the development of intelligent game-playing systems, provid-ing rigorous testbeds for decision-making, strategic planning, and adaptive learning. However, resource-constrained environments pose critical challenges, as conventional deep learning methods heavily rely on extensive datasets and computational resources. In this paper, we propose a lightweight hybrid framework for the Game of the Amazons, which explores the paradigm of weak-to-strong generalization by integrating the structural reasoning of graph-based learning with the generative capabilities of large language models. Specifically, we leverage a Graph Attention Au-toencoder to inform a multi-step Monte Carlo Tree Search, utilize a Stochastic Graph Genetic Algorithm to optimize evaluation signals, and harness GPT-4o-mini to generate synthetic training data. Unlike traditional approaches that rely on expert demonstrations, our framework learns from noisy and imperfect supervision. We demonstrate that the Graph Attention mechanism effectively functions as a structural filter, denoising the LLM’s outputs. Experiments on a 10 ×10 Amazons board show that our hybrid approach not only achieves a 15%–56% improvement in decision accu-racy over baselines but also significantly outperforms its teacher model (GPT-4o-mini), achieving a competitive win rate of 45.0% at N=30 nodes and a decisive 66.5% at only N=50 nodes. These results verify the feasibility of evolv-ing specialized, high-performance game AI from general-purpose foundation models under stringent computational constraints. 

Keywords: Monte Carlo Tree search; Graph Attention Autoencoder; GPT-4o-mini; Graph Genetic Algorithm 

1. Introduction 

With the explosive growth of large language models (Zhao et al., 2023), traditional deep-learning approaches—once at the forefront of AI research—have increasingly fallen out of view. Both paradigms require enormous computational resources, and their real-world adoption remains constrained by the need for high-end hardware. Recently, there has been growing interest in deploying decision-making frameworks in resource-constrained or edge environments. For instance, Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2025) combined multimodal knowledge graphs with LLMs for risk decision-making, while Song et al. (Song et al., 2025) explored Deep Reinforcement Learning for model deployment in edge environments. Similarly, Zhu et al. (Zhu et al., 2025) investigated task offloading using LLM-enhanced Multi-Agent 

> ⋆

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Project of China under Grant (No. 2020YFA0714300), National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (No. 61833005 and 12061088), the Open Project of Key Laboratory of Transport Industry of Comprehensive Transportation Theory (Nanjing Modern Multimodal Transportation Laboratory) under Grant MTF2023004, the China Postdoc-toral Science Foundation under Grant 2024T170129 and Grant GZC20240261. 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

Email addresses: qth2mir@seu.edu.cn (Tianhao Qian), 230229338@seu.edu.cn (Zhuoxuan Li), jdcao@seu.edu.cn (Jinde Cao), xinli_shi@seu.edu.cn (Xinli Shi), liuhanjie1993@gmail.com (Hanjie Liu), leszek.rutkowski@ibspan.waw.pl 

(Leszek Rutkowski) 

> 1

First two authors contributed equally to this work and should be regarded as co-first authors. 

> arXiv:2603.10512v1 [cs.AI] 11 Mar 2026

Reinforcement Learning. However, complex competitive games remain underexplored in this context. If intelligent systems could deliver strong performance on everyday machines, a far broader audience could leverage them, thereby expanding the pool of real-world data and accelerating further research. To test the ability of agents with large models under resource constraints, we tackle this challenge through the lens of the Game of the Amazons. It is a board game with hundreds of branches, making it an ideal testbed for artificial intelligence algorithms (Song and Müller, 2014). The rule of placing a barrier after making a move in Game of the Amazons significantly increases the search space. First-player wins were found for the 4x5, 5x4, 4x6, 5x6, and 4x7 boards, while the 6x4 board turned out to be a second-player win (Song and Müller, 2014). However, the 10x10 boards remain unsolved within the limited time available, leaving room for further research. The number of legal moves in standard Amazons positions often reaches into the hundreds or even thousands, placing tremendous strain on any backwards-pruning search strategy (Hearn, 2005). To tame this combinatorial ex-plosion, Tong et al. (Tong et al., 2019) exploited a parallelised PVS (Proof-Number Search) framework augmented with a transposition table to cut off irrelevant branches more aggressively. They further refined pruning by assign-ing each candidate move a historical-heuristic score, which markedly improved search efficiency. Dehghani et al. (Dehghani and Babamir, 2017) proposed a genetic-algorithm (GA) approach for search-space reduction. Their ex-periments demonstrated that, whereas the runtime of traditional Min-Max grows exponentially with search depth, the GA-based method scales much more gently and overtakes Min-Max performance once trees exceed a moderate depth threshold. However, their reliance on a relatively simple evaluation function may fail to capture the nuanced structure of complex board states. Although the movement range in Game of the Amazons is limited to a 10x10 grid, its unique movement rules result in a search space that can rival that of Go. It is also the reason why Game of the Amazons is chosen. The Game of the Amazons is played on a square grid, featuring two distinct sets of pieces for each player. Each player controls four pieces. For each step, a player should move one of the four pieces to a grid that is in a straight line from the current grid, and then place a barrier that blocks movement according to the same rule. The objective of the game is to restrict the opponent’s movement until no piece can move. Consequently, machines need to consider two factors when making a move: • Machines must be careful about the move that is optimal for restricting the opponent’s move. In some cases, this move will put our other pieces in jeopardy, while in other cases, such a sacrifice is beneficial to winning the whole game. Deciding on numerous choices is key for machines to learn, as there is no straightforward construction for most of these values (Snatzke, 2004). • They need to predict the implications of every move. In addition to the current board information, any future board information can be crucial to winning the entire game. Thus, the opponent’s move should be taken into consideration. Such an operation can be implemented by searching. However, as the search depth increases, the cost of searching will become exponential. Now, a question is raised: Is it possible to achieve good results without searching for deeper nodes? The Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm is widely used in various intelligent agent game scenarios and has attracted widespread attention from researchers (Kim et al., 2024; ´ Swiechowski et al., 2023; Moon et al., 2022; Crippa et al., 2022). The number of legal moves in standard Amazons positions often reaches into the hundreds or even thousands, placing tremendous strain on any backwards-pruning search strategy (Hearn, 2005). To tame this combi-natorial explosion, Tong et al. (Tong et al., 2019) exploited a parallelised PVS (Proof-Number Search) framework augmented with a transposition table to cut off irrelevant branches more aggressively. They further refined pruning by assigning each candidate move a historical-heuristic score, which markedly improved search efficiency. Dehghani et al. (Dehghani and Babamir, 2017) proposed a genetic-algorithm (GA) approach for search-space reduction. Their experiments demonstrated that, whereas the runtime of traditional Min-Max grows exponentially with search depth, the GA-based method scales much more gently and overtakes Min-Max performance once trees exceed a moderate depth threshold. However, their reliance on a relatively simple evaluation function may fail to capture the nuanced structure of complex board states. Besides the use of primitive UCTS, Fu et al. (Fu et al., 2018) put forward a staged UCT(Upper Confidence Bound Apply to Tree) algorithm. In their work, Linear Discriminant Analysis (Fisher, 1936) was first used to compress information from feature points on a 10x10 chessboard into a two-dimensional space. Then, the K-means algorithm divided the stages of the game. Such algorithm enabled different weights. 2Additionally, in the study of computer games, estimating the game situation is another key focus. Jianbo et al. (Jianbo et al., 2019) combined convolutional neural networks with reinforcement learning to create a comprehensive representation space. The former trained convolutional neural networks with eight 10x10 layers, and the latter consid-ered nine 10x10 layers. What makes it different is that the latter utilised the k-average clustering algorithm to divide chess stages and thus achieved a better result. Both networks were trained by reinforcement learning. However, it lost its interpretability. Kagkas et al. (Kagkas et al., 2023) proposed an estimator based on a radial basis neural network for the high-dimensional representation of the game situation, which ensured the robustness of the valuation. Hsueh et al. (Hsueh and Ikeda, 2024) proposed a new situation-based smoothing function to calculate move scores to solve the problem of Go advantage controlling scores. Deep learning and reinforcement learning approaches have shown promise in Game of the Amazons (Jianbo et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021), but they suffer from a lack of interpretability and impose stringent requirements on data quality. In particular, because Game of the Amazons is relatively obscure, historical game records are scarce, making it difficult to learn reliable value functions. Moreover, the evaluation of any given position is inherently non-fixed, so one must transform the underlying score matrix: linear mappings struggle to capture a sufficiently rich feature space, while nonlinear mappings often obscure interpretability. Finally, by relying almost exclusively on neural-network-based inference, these methods downplay human expertise and risk overfitting to their own limited experience. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2021) split the neural network into a rule network and a skill network, thereby improving the learning speed and alleviating the severe dependence on computing resources. To address these challenges, we present a novel MCTS framework tailored to the Game of the Amazons. As a foundation, we replace conventional exhaustive search trees with a Monte Carlo Tree structure, intrinsically reducing computational overhead. Building on this baseline, we introduce a multi-round, depth-focused search strategy that curbs the exponential growth of the tree—allowing us to probe deeper nodes without incurring the cost of exhaustive breadth searches. Accurate state evaluation is essential for this targeted approach, so we incorporate two lightweight autoencoder layers—one for movement steps and one for placement steps—to refine the evaluation parameters with minimal added latency. Next, we enhance candidate selection from both stochastic and structural perspectives: the Graph-Attention Autoencoder (GAT-AE) captures MCTS-generated graph structure via a graph-attention autoencoder, while the Stochastic Graph Genetic Algorithm (SGGA) injects controlled randomness into candidate sampling. Fi-nally, to train these components without relying on human game logs, we generate synthetic data using large language models and introduce an update mechanism that decouples objective values from their origins. Empirical results demonstrate that our algorithm’s performance is insensitive to search depth—effectively resolving the traditional trade-off between depth and candidate quality—and offers a fresh perspective on tree-based candidate selection.In summary, our contributions can be summarized as follows: • A novel general architecture. We build a novel architecture that allows for transferability. In detail, the game of Amazons can simulate real-time decision-making processes in reality and assist humans in making deci-sions. Our model abstracts players’ assets or actions as pieces on a chessboard and allows for the selection of influencing factors. This approach combines traditional deep learning with objective function methods, making our model more interpretable than conventional deep learning and more accurate than manually constructed objective function methods. Besides, our model is capable of capturing the structure of the tree from both the perspective of the neighboring nodes and the overall view. • A shift in perspective. Generally speaking, deeper and larger node searches can lead to higher accuracy, but they also result in significantly increased search time. Our model addresses this issue by employing methods such as multi-round searches and demonstrates that, under certain conditions, incorporating techniques from machine learning and deep learning can yield satisfactory results. • Validation of Weak-to-Strong Generalization. Unlike traditional methods relying on expert data, we ex-plore the paradigm of “weak-to-strong generalization” (Burns et al., 2024). We utilize a general-purpose LLM (GPT-4o-mini) as a weak supervisor to generate noisy training signals. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed Graph Attention mechanism effectively functions as an information bottleneck, filtering out the super-visor’s errors (hallucinations) while retaining structural strategies. This proves that our framework can evolve a specialized “strong student” model from a “weak teacher,” offering a viable path for domains lacking expert data. 32. Preliminaries 

In this section, we first define the problem of the Game of the Amazons. Then, we introduce the design of the evaluation function. 

2.1. Game of Amazons Rules 

Amazon, invented by Walter Zamkauskas in 1988, was played on a square board, specifically 10x10 in this work, with each player owing four amazons. The Game of the Amazons can be formalized as a triplet S = ⟨Cw, C b, B ⟩,where Cw = [ Cw1 , C w2 , C w3 , C w4 ] denotes a list of pieces, each Cwi representing the positional information of the 

ith white piece. Similarly, Cb = [ Cb1 , C b2 , C b3 , C b4 ] specifies the positional information of the black pieces, while B

represents the set of all barrier positions on the board. At an intermediate turn in the game, the board configuration is shown in yboard, where X denotes a barrier and the black and white pieces represent the two players’ pieces. 

> Fig. 1: The Board Configuration of One Turn.

The state of the board at the ith turn is denoted as Si, and the sequence of board states from the start of the game up to the current turn is expressed as Si = [ s0, s 1, . . . , s i]. In each turn, players alternately move one of their four pieces and subsequently place a barrier. The game terminates when a player is unable to execute a valid move, resulting in their loss. The objective is to determine the final sequence of states, S∗, such that no further updates to the board state are possible. 

2.2. Autoencoder(AE) 

The structure of autoencoder (Michelucci, 2022) consists of two parts: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder maps the input data x to features z in the latent space, and the decoder decodes it back to ˆx, making it as close to the original input as possible. Its structure is shown in Fig.2. 

> Fig. 2: The Structure of Autoencoder Model.

Autoencoder is to learn the functions A : Rn → Rp (encoder) and B : Rp → Rn (decoder) that satisfy: 4c arg min  

> A,B

E [∆ ( x, B (A(x)))] (1) where E denotes the expectation over the input distribution, and ∆ is the reconstruction loss function, typically set to the l2-norm (Bank et al., 2023). The input and output layer has a dimension of 5 to represent the 5 measures we design, which will be introduced in the following paragraph. The hidden layer has a dimension of 3, which is chosen based on our experience. 

2.3. Graph Attention Networks (GAT) 

GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al., 2018) was developed after Graph Convoluted Network(GCN), which is unable to solve inductive problems. Typically, GAT consists of global graph attention or mask graph attention. In our work, the later one was opted, which making full use of the graph’s structure. Compared to vectors, graphs have the advantage of being able to represent complex relationships and connections between data points in a more dynamic and flexible manner. A weight matrix W and α, a function mapping high-dimension concatenated features into a real number, are two vital parameters. They compute attention coefficients eij , indicating the importance of node j’s features to node i’s: 

eij = α(W⃗ hi, W⃗hj ) (2) 

α is a shared attentional mechanism and also a single-layer feedforward neural network, such as LeakyReLU activation. To make coefficients easily comparable across different nodes, we normalize them across all choices of j using the softmax function (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al., 2018): 

αij = softmax j (eij ) = exp (eij )

P

> k∈Ni

exp (eik ) . (3) To obtain ⃗ h′ 

> i

, we still take advantage of W and αij :⃗h′ 

> i

= σ( X

> j∈Ni

αkij W⃗ hj ), (4) where σ aggregates features from each head, ⃗ hj represents the input of node j while ⃗ h′ 

> i

represents the output of node i. In our work, input is a 1x5 tensor generated from the output of the AutoEncoder and output is a value ranging from 0 to 1, representing the quality of the move from the worst to the best. 8 attention heads are used in this model. 

2.4. Design of the Evaluation Function 

Manually designed evaluation measures, while unable to fully capture the intricacies of the representation space, provide a basis for further refinement. This study employs four measures inspired by value and knowledge domains, in addition to a metric adapted from previous research. These measures are described below: 1. Adjacency-Territory : This measure computes the ratio of squares accessible to a player’s pieces compared to those accessible to their opponent’s. A square is considered "occupied" by the white pieces if it can be reached more quickly by them, adhering to the rule that movement occurs to an adjacent square in each step. 2. Line-Territory : Similar to adjacency-territory, this measure evaluates the ratio of accessible squares. However, in this case, a square is considered "occupied" by the white pieces if it can be reached more quickly by them when movement occurs in a straight line in each step. 3. One-Mobility : This metric quantifies the number of adjacent squares that the moved piece can reach in its immediate vicinity. The value is normalized by dividing it by 8, ensuring it falls within the range [0 , 1] .54. Line-Mobility : This measure calculates the number of reachable squares for all four of a player’s pieces after placing a barrier. To normalize the metric, the value is divided by 4, yielding a range [0 , 1] .5. Position : The position metric is defined as follows: 

p =

P

> A



2D11 (A)−D21 (A)



, if turn ≤ 30 ,

P

> A



2D12 (A)−D22 (A)



, if turn > 30 , (5) where this formulation is adapted from the work (Lieberum, 2005). Here, D1(A) represents the minimum number of steps required for any piece to reach square A under the rule of straight-line movement, and D2(A)

denotes the minimum steps required under adjacent-square movement. The superscripts 1 and 2 refer to the white and black sides, respectively. Collectively, these evaluation measures aim to quantify positional and territorial advantages, enabling a compre-hensive assessment of board states. 

3. General Architecture 

3.1. Overall framework 

> Fig. 3: Overall framework of the proposed method.

Our work is divided into two stages. The first stage is a training stage, where UCT-AE model and GAT-AE model are trained using the data generated by large language models with the help of stochastic graph genetic algorithm. After training, two models are utilized in the second stage, the application stage. More details will be discussed in the next section. We suppose that these two models are complementary stochastically and structurally in that order, which will thus improve the overall performance. To validate our assumption, we mainly design competition experiments, including any model of our hybrid model and GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024), the data provider Fig.3 depicts the overall framework of the proposed method. The pseudo-code of our main framework is also provided in Table 1. 

3.2. Training Stage 

Traditionally, the evaluation function is constrained to its human-made representation if the training resource is limited. In this work, our goal is to reverse this trend by integrating it with our hybrid model so that the intelligent system can be greatly improved. We first introduce MCTS with an update mechanism. Then, three models are introduced sequentially in detail. Finally, how we generate data by using GPT-4o-mini, with SGGA augmented, is introduced. 6Table 1: AI Move and Placement Strategy (MCTS + SGGA + GAT-AE) 

Algorithm 1 AI Move and Placement Strategy 

Input: Initial board state B0, time limit Tmax , SGGA crossover rate σ

Output: Selected move m∗

1 Initialize MCTS tree T ← root( B0)

2 Load Autoencoder on CPU; Load GAT on GPU 

3 t ← 0, start timer, set mode m ∈ { 0, 1} (BLACK/WHITE) 

4 while t < T max do 

5 C ← UCT-AE_Select( T )

6 Update board and tree: B ← B ∪ nnew , T ← insert( T , n new )

7 t ← elapsed() 

8 end while 

9 Perform SGGA: 

10 nnew ← SGGA( σ, T , COUN T ER )

11 repeat 

12 nnew ← SGGA( σ, n new , COUN T ER )

13 until N odeCount (nnew ) ≥ 2(Height max −N odeHeight (nnew )+1) 

or COUN T ER ≥ 50000 

14 Choose node n∗ = nnew or None 

15 Construct subgraph (X, A ) ← ExtractGraph( n∗)

16 y ← GAT -AE( X, A )

17 m∗ ← arg max i yi

18 return Decision_Strategy( m∗,n∗)

3.2.1. Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with Update Mechanism 

The MCTS algorithm starts from the current state and gradually builds a game tree. Each iteration includes four steps: selection, expansion, simulation, and backtracking. The specific process is shown in Fig.4. 

> Fig. 4: The Structure of MCTS.

The selection step is to start from the root node and select the most promising child node according to a certain strategy until a node that is not fully expanded is reached. The expansion step is to randomly select one from the unexplored child nodes of the node and add it to the game tree. The simulation step is to start from the node and randomly play the game until a termination condition is met. The backtracking step is to start from the node and backtrack up along the game tree to update the number of visits and cumulative rewards of each node. When the predetermined number of iterations or time limit is reached, the algorithm is ended and one MCT is successfully constructed. The advantages of the MCTS algorithm are general, adaptive, and controllable while the disadvantages are low search efficiency and some of the nodes searched are useless. Hayes et al. (Hayes et al., 2022) proposed DMCTS(Distributional MCTS), maintaining a posterior distribution over value estimates at each node and employing Thompson sampling to draw a sample from each node’s posterior distribution. Inspired by this distributional perspective and thinking that the quality of data can not be ensured, we hypothesized that deeper nodes may accumulate greater variance due to compounding estimation errors, noting that 7deeper nodes in tree search are inherently derived from shallower ones. Thus, instead of leveraging the distribution constructed by DMCTS, we proposed a global depth normalization mechanism that rescales each node’s value relative to its depth. This normalization aligns nodes from different layers onto a comparable value scale, with the objective value of any node normalized to the [0,1] range, mitigating the effect of depth-induced noise and promoting fairer evaluation across the tree. Specifically, we introduced a two-stage recursive value-propagation scheme for rooted trees, designed to encode both depth-dependent nonlinear accumulation and global depth normalization. Let each node n carry an objective value obj (n), and let height (n) denote its depth (root at height 1), with the overall maximum depth of the tree denoted Hmax . The update proceeds in two phases: 

1. Depth-Dependent Accumulation (Pass I). Starting from the leaves and proceeding upward, each internal node n

computes the arithmetic mean of its children’s states from upper layers to lower layers alternatively, 

¯v(n) = 1

|Ch (n)|

X

> c∈Ch (n)

obj (c) (6) Since in board game simulations, nodes at successive depths alternate between the agent and the opponent, we then updates its own state according to the parity of its nesting depth: 

obj (n) ←

(

obj (n) + ¯ v(n), if height (n) is even ,

obj (n) + 2 −¯v(n), if height (n) is odd (7) 

2−¯v(n) ensures that when the opponent node’s objective value is 0, the parent node receives a full reward of 1 while the value is 1, the parent node will still receive a reward of 0.5. This design aims to encourage the model to place greater emphasis on constraining the behavior of opponent nodes. 

2. Global Depth Normalization (Pass II). Once all nodes have accumulated their depth-dependent contributions, a second top-down traversal rescales each node’s final state by: 

obj (n) ← obj (n)

Hmax + 1 − height (n) (8) This normalization introduces a depth-based penalty to mitigate the risk of error propagation in deep searches. Since evaluation scores at deeper nodes rely on longer chains of simulations, they inherently carry higher variance and uncertainty. By scaling the objective value inversely with depth, we effectively implement a linear discount factor .This mechanism prioritizes reliable, near-term rewards over distant, uncertain projections, preventing the MCTS from over-committing to deep branches based on potentially flawed simulations. This two-pass mechanism simultaneously (a) injects nonlinear, depth-sensitive weighting factors into local updates and (b) enforces a consistent global normalization so that deeper and shallower nodes remain directly comparable. This benefits SGGA by fairly selecting the next generations. 

3.2.2. UCT algorithm combined with autoencoder (UCT-AE) 

To construct the UCT, we utilize traditional MCTS algorithm without requiring any prior knowledge or evaluation function, but only the rules of the game. The UCT algorithm improves the MCTS algorithm by introducing a strategy for balancing exploration and ex-ploitation, thereby improving the efficiency of step selection. This strategy calculates a confidence upper bound based on the average reward and the number of visits to each node to measure the potential of each node. Then the child node with the highest confidence upper bound is selected in order to find the optimal action. In our work, the input consists of a 1 × 5 tensor v, representing five measures in the objective function at the ith 

turn. The input tensor is first processed by a linear layer that transforms the 5-dimensional space into a 3-dimensional 8latent space, followed by a ReLU activation function to introduce nonlinearity. The resulting 1 × 3 tensor is then passed through a second linear layer, which maps the 3-dimensional space back to a 5-dimensional space, and is subsequently subjected to a Tanh activation function. This sequence of transformations produces a 1 × 5 output tensor 

v’ = AE (v).Due to the two-step rule that differentiates our approach from other board games, two distinct autoencoders are employed, denoted as AE = [ AE 1, AE 2], corresponding to these operations. Softmax normalization was applied to enhance the randomness of simulations, thereby enabling the simulation of diverse scenarios. Subsequent experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of this modification. We prioritize simplicity by avoiding overly complex models, as increased model complexity would significantly extend the search time of one node, then accumulating. Thus, the UCT-AE algorithm, an approach combining Monte Carlo Tree with autoencoder, is utilized to simulate players’ moves in our work. To determine which move to simulate, an objective function is incorporated. The modified Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) of jth node expression is as follows: 

UCB j = AE 1(vj )W1 +

s

2 ln nnj + 1 (9) where AE 1 is the first autoencoder for movement, vj represents the five measures of the jth node, n is the total number of simulations, and nj is the number of times the jth arm has been selected. This formulation effectively balances exploitation and exploration. In designing the objective function, traditional method typically relied on experience and prior research findings. However, this approach requires researchers to understand the intrinsic principles of the Game of Amazons, making it challenging to achieve comparable accuracy. To address this, autoencoders are used to remap the input, enhancing feature representation capabilities and modifying the objective function. The overall value is computed as: 

vj = α · AE 1(vj )W1 + (1 − α) · AE 2(vj )W2 +

s

2 ln nnj + 1 (10) where α is an adjustable parameter. 

3.2.3. Graph Attention Networks based on AutoEncoder model(GAT-AE) 

Fig.5 illustrates the information flow into the GAT-AE model. Typically, GAT requires both an adjacency matrix and a node feature matrix. To minimize redundancy, the four root nodes are temporarily aggregated into a single super-node. Let us denote the input as X; the GAT-AE first processes it via Eq.10. After the graph attention layers, the output is passed through a shifted activation function: 

O = f (vj ) = tanh( vj ) + 1 2 (11) 

O represents the normalized output of the GAT-AE, mapping raw scores to the interval [0 , 1] . We utilize this formulation to leverage the high sensitivity of the tanh function around the origin. Unlike a standard linear mapping, this non-linear transformation creates a sharp decision boundary , pushing the output values towards saturation (0 or 1). This is crucial for the subsequent Stochastic Graph Genetic Algorithm (SGGA), as it provides clear, binary-like distinction signals between favorable and unfavorable moves, thereby enhancing the selection pressure during the evolutionary optimization process without requiring gradient-based updates. Our hybrid model combines GAT with SGGA to select the next step from stochastic and structural perspective. Thus, the probability distribution can be grasped so that the state of the board is visualized by the count of the node, rewards, to analyze which piece is superior further. 9Fig. 5: The Structure of Autoencoder Model. 

3.2.4. Stochastic Graph Genetic Algorithm (SGGA) 

Traditional MCTS constructs a tree involving several nodes. SGGA first connects four head nodes, representing four Amazons on the board, together with undirected edges, so that the Monte Carlo Tree becomes a graph. Next, the genetic algorithm was born out of necessity to decompose the score of each node into a probability distribution. In detail, it goes through Selection, Mutation, and Crossover: 1. Selection 

Our selection module ensures system execution by sampling two candidate nodes from a genetic repository according to a softmax distribution. This repository stores the history of all generated nodes, and thus the initialization of it must include two nodes. Without the selection state, it will be too slow to reach the expected node. · 2. Mutation 

Our mutation is also named after biased random walk (Grover and Leskovec, 2016). When applied to current node, the subsequent node selected ranges from its children as well as its parent node with mutation step Size 

σ = 0 .8, indicating that the subsequent node is likely to be the parent node of the current one with the possibility of 0.2 or the children node of the current one with the possibility of 0.8. Due to the connection of four head nodes, the subsequent nodes may diverge into different trajectories, resulting in an increase in the node count. Then the subsequent node becomes the next generation. 3. Crossover 

Our crossover occurs when two candidates are located at the same position. When it takes place, only one candidate will be additionally added to the genetic repository. The system will continue operating until the count of any node meets: 

NodeCount ≥ 2

 Heightmax −NodeHeight +1 



. (12) where NodeCount is the count of a certain node, Heightmax is the maximum height of every node, and NodeHeight 

refers to the height of a certain node. The population size ranges from 2 to 50000, meaning that we select two head nodes as initial generations, and if only one node is explored during MCTS, this node will be copied. The upper bound of the number of generations is 50000 in case of a dead end. After selecting the targeted node, we finally trace back to the trajectory of the target node to get the next movement and placement. You can quickly grasp it by reading Fig.6. Altarabichi et al. e(Altarabichi et al., 2023) embedded the surrogate model into the GA loop to create CHC_QX, showing that CHC_QX converges faster and selects feature subsets that yield noticeably higher classification accuracy. Although this work focuses on feature selection, it reviews how GA-based instance selection by choosing the most 10 informative training samples can reduce dataset size and improve classifier performance. Similarly, Pongthanisorn and Capi (Pongthanisorn and Capi, 2024) leveraged a genetic algorithm to optimize data quality, which improved classification accuracy and reduced training time. While GA-based methods can accelerate training and improve model performance by selecting high-quality sam-ples, they have not been evaluated on training datasets with unpredictable data quality. In contrast, our work is the first to demonstrate the feasibility of SGGA for selecting LLM-generated training data of uncontrolled quality to train deep learning models. 

> Fig. 6: The structure of Stochastic Graph Genetic Algorithm.

3.2.5. Training Data Generation 

Nadas et al.(Nadas et al., 2025) provide evidence that in resource-constrained settings, fine-tuned LLMs can gener-ate high-quality synthetic data that substantially improves the performance of smaller downstream models. Similarly, Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2024) leveraged synthetic data generated by LLMs to compensate for real and rare samples. In our work, we completely utilized the data prepared by using large language models, specifically GPT-4o-mini. When the information of the chessboard and the position of each move are provided, large language models can accordingly give a rating for that move. However, a significant challenge arises from their failure to represent a multi-digit floating-point number when rating. Thus, SGGA is put forward to decompose these scores into the probability distribution of the graph. Our next move and placement selections are based on these models, our hybrid model. In the section of Experiment and Analysis 4, we provide results comparison, indicating that without finetuning LLMs and simply leveraging the graph structure derived from MCTS, LLMs can still generate data suitable for training deep learning models. Significantly, our SGGA plays a key role. 

3.3. Application Stage 

Our model is tested in the Game of Amazons. The two-step rule makes it different from other board games, resulting in a greatly increased search space. Under these circumstances, the cost of searching deeper nodes will be exponential. By applying this model to Game of the Amazons, the goal is to test the effectiveness of our model. For application stage, UCT-AE model is still used to strike the balance between exploitation and exploration. What makes it different from training stage is that SGGA is integrated with GAT-AE to comprehensively make the optimal decision. 11 3.4. Decision Strategy 

The decision strategy between two decisions needs thorough future research. In practical usage, the responsibility lies with players, while the final decision lies in their overall objective value randomly in this paper. 

4. Experiment and Analysis 

In this part, our experimental results and analysis are presented in detail, divided into three parts. First, the loss Analysis is presented, particularly focusing on the comparison between MCELoss for movement and placement. Sec-ond, the main experiment against GPT-4o-mini is conducted to justify the effectiveness of our hybrid model. Finally, ablation studies against various baseline models (UCTS-AE, SGGA, GAT-AE) were conducted to comprehensively evaluate the competitive strength and the necessity of each component, as summarized in Fig.15. To validate our model, we constructed the Game of Amazons system. The experiments were conducted on the equipment of AMD Radeon(TM) 780M and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Laptop GPU. Compared to other models, our hardware setup is relatively modest, which highlights our algorithm’s ability to deliver excellent performance on lower-end hardware, substantially lowering the barrier to entry, enabling a wider range of users to deploy and run the system without high-end devices, and fostering broader adoption and usage. 

4.1. Loss Analysis 

In Figs.7-8, the training loss curves for the movement and placement tasks are plotted, respectively. The blue curves show the raw MSELoss values, while the red curves are smoothed with a moving average using a window size of 50. For the movement task, the loss declines rapidly from approximately 0.04 to 0.01 within the first 500 iterations before leveling off. In contrast, the placement task’s loss drops from about 0.03 to 0.01 over the first 500 iterations but then plateaus, showing little further improvement. In detail, while the initial loss in our work appears lower than that in other works, it should be noted that one limitation of our loss curve is that it does not include the very early stages of training. However, this omission does not affect the overall analysis, as the convergence behavior of our model remains stable and consistent with a great difference in these two figures. For example, during the plateau phase, MSE loss of the placement task shows pronounced fluctuations, while that of the movement task oscillates much less, indicating a more stable convergence behavior and lower variance than that of the placement task loss. To illustrate it numerically, the variance of two curves is computed. After epoch 50, we sample the loss values for the movement and placement actions. The variance of the loss of movement action reaches 8.0 × 10 −6 while that of the loss of placement action reaches 2.1 × 10 −5.An F-test yielded F( d1, d2) = Fvalue , p = 0.035, indicating a statistically significant difference in variances at the 

α = 0 .05 level. 

> Fig. 7: Training loss of movement action

12 Fig. 8: Training loss of movement action of placement action 

Also, this contrast suggests that the model is capable of learning meaningful representations for movement, whereas the learned features for placement lack generalizability under the same model architecture. This discrep-ancy can be partly attributed to the different strategies employed in selecting the next movement and placement. Specifically, SGGA was adopted for movement selection, while a simple weighted random selection was used for placement. This difference in strategy introduces a bias in data selection. The results suggest that our use of SGGA effectively reduces the variance in node selection. One of the explanations suggests that SGGA may enhance the overall quality of the training data since the policy was the only variable modified. 

4.2. Main Experiment: Competitions Against Teacher Model GPT-4o-mini  

> Fig. 9: Comparison between Hybrid Model and GPT-4o-mini under N=30 and N=50 search constraints

Fig.9 illustrates the performance of our hybrid model against GPT-4o-mini. In alignment with our resource-constrained objective, the primary goal of this experiment was not merely to achieve victory, but rather to evaluate the minimum search scale required by our framework to surpass the generative decision-making of a high-performance LLM. As shown, with a highly restricted budget of only N=30 nodes, our model already reaches a competitive win rate of 45.0%. When the search limit is slightly extended to N=50, the win rate significantly increases to 66.5%, effectively crossing the threshold of victory. This result highlights the efficiency of our hybrid framework: it requires an extremely small computational foot-print to outperform its "teacher" model. Notably, the differences between this experiment and those preceding it lie in the specific search iterations chosen to probe the efficiency boundary against the powerful capabilities of GPT. Even at N=50, the computational scale of our hybrid model remains orders of magnitude smaller than that of GPT. 13 Furthermore, it was observed that GPT-4o-mini often struggled to accurately track the coordinates of the four ’Ama-zons’, necessitating explicit location prompts and strict rule-based constraints to prevent illegal moves. In summary, our hybrid model successfully distills evaluation knowledge from GPT but ultimately outperforms it by leveraging the structural reasoning of GAT and the stochastic optimization of SGGA, demonstrating a clear "weak-to-strong" generalization in low-resource settings. 

4.3. Ablation Studies: Competitions Against Different Baselines 

In this section, the results of our hybrid model against various models were shown and analyzed. Under extensive node-searching conditions, we repeated the above experiments to ensure extensive node-searching would not disrupt the trend. Typically, the hybrid model may not necessarily enhance performance and could even worsen the situation due to inconsistencies in decision-making if their representation spaces are either identical or incomplete. To testify the effectiveness, the ideal way is to exhibit the complementarity of the hybrid model. Therefore, we conducted competitions between our hybrid model and other models, including UCTS-AE, GAT-AE, and SGGA, to justify the complementarity. To illustrate that this result still holds with different numbers of nodes searched, we changed the termination condition from 20 to 30 nodes and repeated the experiment. For UCTS-AE model, we use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01, and the mean squared error (MSE) loss function as the optimization criterion; For GAT-AE model, we use the RMSprop optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001, and the Smooth L1 loss as the optimization criterion. The settings of these two models in our hybrid model are identical to those of UCTS-AE and GAT-AE models. 

> Fig. 10: Overall Performance of Hybrid Model under 20 numbers of node searched
> Fig. 11: Overall Performance of Hybrid Model under 30 numbers of node searched

To comprehensively illustrate the overall trend, Fig.10 and Fig.11 display the combined win-rate curves of our hybrid model against all three baselines under 20 and 30 nodes searched, respectively. In the following, we analyze the specific comparison for each baseline. 

Hybrid Model vs UCTS-AE: UCTS-AE serves as a powerful nonlinear transformation module within our system. As illustrated in Fig.12, our model achieves a 79.5% win rate (159/200) against the UCTS-AE baseline when limited to 20 nodes. Moreover, the win-rate curve remains remarkably stable across games, demonstrating that using the same evaluation function, our architectural modifications lead to more consistent and effective play strategy. The remaining 20.5% of losses can largely be attributed to occasional failures in identifying decisive moves during critical game states, suggesting a promising avenue for further refinement. Under 30 numbers of nodes searched, our hybrid model achieves a 73.5% win rate (147/200) against the UCTS-AE baseline, which suggests that the model with more nodes searched still has its advantage. However, whether it’s effective with a large number of nodes searched is still unknown. 

Hybrid Model vs SGGA: SGGA model serves as a model used for capturing the relationship of neighboring nodes in the Monte Carlo Tree. As illustrated in Fig.13, the win rate of our hybrid model against the SGGA model reaches 58.5% (117/200) under 20 nodes searched. In SGGA, while the selection of the tree nodes relies on the objective value, the distribution of the tree focuses on the neighboring nodes of one target node. Simply put, when a node has fewer neighbor nodes, it will be more likely to be the next generation. SGGA is a purely stochastic algorithm and the result shows that the model relying simply on probability itself fails to perform as well as that with a structural 14 Fig. 12: Comparison between Hybrid Model and UCTS-AE 

Fig. 13: Comparison between Hybrid Model and SGGA 

15 algorithm, underlying the effectiveness of our proposed model. Besides, our hybrid model achieves a 59.0% win rate (118/200) against the SGGA baseline under 30 numbers of nodes searched, suggesting that more nodes searched will not damage the effectiveness of our models. But similarly, whether it’s effective with a large number of nodes searched is still unknown. 

> Fig. 14: Comparison between Hybrid Model and GAT-AE

Hybrid Model vs GAT-AE: The GAT-AE model serves as a model used for capturing the structure of the Monte Carlo Tree, which compensates for the drawback of the SGGA model. As is shown in Fig.14, the win rate of our hybrid model against the GAT-AE model reaches around 62.0% (124/200) under 20 numbers of node searched. While train-ing such a complicated model usually requires expensive datasets, our algorithm utilizes inexpensive data generated by LLMs and shows its feasibility. Under 30 numbers of node searched, our hybrid model achieves a 57.5% win rate (115/200) against the GAT-AE baseline. The little decline in win rate can be partially attributed to the incompleteness of training if the GAT-AE model. However, the result still shows its effectiveness. In conclusion, our hybrid model is effective under resource-limited settings with both 20 node searched and 30 node searched. 

4.4. Overall Results 

To evaluate the overall strength of our proposed framework, we present Fig.15 to better illustrate the compari-son between our hybrid model against the teacher model (GPT-4o-mini) and various ablation baselines (UCTS-AE, SGGA, GAT-AE). We also compute standard error confidence intervals based on the empirical binomial proportion of the final win rates. 16 Fig. 15: Win Rate Comparison Experiments 

The models were each robustly evaluated over 200 games. In the figure, the win rates of our hybrid model against various opponents are displayed across different node search limits (N=20, N=30, and N=50). Against the ablation baselines (UCTS-AE, SGGA, GAT-AE), our model achieves win rates ranging from 57.5% to 79.5% under N=20 and N=30 search conditions. Notably, in the main experiment against the teacher model (GPT-4o-mini), our hybrid frame-work achieves a 45.0% win rate at N=30, which significantly improves to 66.5% when the search limit is increased to N=50. The results demonstrate that our algorithm can effectively enhance the system’s strength under rather small search iterations and resource-limited settings, thereby validating its improvements over traditional models in both decision-making and evaluation functions. 

5. Discussion 

5.1. Weak Supervision and Beyond 

It is worth noting that while established handcrafted engines (e.g., Invader) represent the current ceiling of per-formance in Amazons, they rely on decades of domain-specific heuristics that are hard to transfer to other problems. In contrast, our work focuses on the generalizability of learning from weak supervision . We acknowledge that in terms of absolute ELO rating, our model currently trails behind these specialized engines. However, our framework demonstrates autonomous improvement purely from natural language prompts, validating a path for domains where expert heuristics are unavailable. Our results align with the findings of Burns et al. (Burns et al., 2024), demonstrating that a strong student model (our Hybrid Framework) can be elicited from a weak supervisor (GPT-4o-mini). The observed performance gap (Stu-dent > Teacher) confirms that our architectural components—specifically the GAT-AE and SGGA—act as effective 

information bottlenecks . By constraining the learning process to topological features, the model filters out the super-visor’s inconsistencies (hallucinations) while retaining generalizable strategic logic. This suggests that our framework is not merely a game solver, but a viable prototype for deploying evolved AI agents in domains where only imperfect or noisy supervision is available. 

5.2. Robustness against Hallucinations 

A key concern in using LLMs for data augmentation is the presence of noise, such as illegal or suboptimal moves. Our ablation studies reveal that the Graph Attention mechanism is critical for mitigating this issue. Since the GAT is constrained to learn graph-topological features of the board, it cannot memorize the random noise inherent in the 17 LLM’s raw output. Instead, it captures consistent, underlying strategic patterns (e.g., territory connectivity). This allows the model to “denoise” the training signal, effectively correcting the teacher’s errors during the distillation process. 

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, a resource-limited hybrid model was proposed for an intelligent system by integrating SGGA with GAT-AE, which fully captures the value and structure of Monte Carlo Tree. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to do a resource-limited task on the Game of the Amazons. A deep learning model was trained using inexpensive data generated by LLMs, and its effectiveness was validated by testing three models against our hybrid model. Our algorithm has observed a radical success in combating classic models and GPT-4o-mini with rather small search iterations. Looking ahead, there are two areas for future research. First, we need to clarify how to determine if the model has been fully trained. It is challenging to assess this solely through the loss value, as the values are relatively close to each other. Second, developing a decision strategy for final choice is vital. While a choice was made based on randomness in this paper, such research will further enhance the intelligent system and help explore the upper limits of our algorithm. 

References 

W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong, et al., A survey of large language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 (2023). L. Yang, Y. Li, J. Tan, L. Mao, Research on risk decision-making generation method for water conservancy project based on multimodal knowledge graph and large language model, PLoS One 20 (2025) e0330258. doi: doi: 10. 1371/journal.pone.0330258 .X. Song, R. Yin, J. Feng, X. Yang, L. Liu, C. Wu, Deep reinforcement learning-based methods for model deploy-ment in edge environments, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2025 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Work-shops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–6. doi: doi: 10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS65812.2025. 11152901 .F. Zhu, F. Huang, Y. Yu, G. Liu, T. Huang, Task offloading with llm-enhanced multi-agent reinforcement learning in uav-assisted edge computing, Sensors 25 (2025) 175. doi: doi: 10.3390/s25010175 .J. Song, M. Müller, An enhanced solver for the game of amazons, IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 7 (2014) 16–27. R. A. Hearn, Amazons is pspace-complete, arXiv preprint cs/0502013 (2005). B. Tong, H. Qiu, T. Guo, Y. Wang, Research and application of parallel computing of pvs algorithm based on amazon human-machine game, in: 2019 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 6293–6298. H. Dehghani, S. M. Babamir, A ga based method for search-space reduction of chess game-tree, Applied Intelligence 47 (2017) 752–768. R. G. Snatzke, New results of exhaustive search in the game amazons, Theoretical computer science 313 (2004) 499–509. M.-J. Kim, D. Lee, J. S. Kim, C. W. Ahn, Surrogate-assisted monte carlo tree search for real-time video games, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108152. M. ´ Swiechowski, K. Godlewski, B. Sawicki, J. Ma´ ndziuk, Monte carlo tree search: A review of recent modifications and applications, Artificial Intelligence Review 56 (2023) 2497–2562. J. Moon, Y. Choi, T. Park, J. Choi, J.-H. Hong, K.-J. Kim, Diversifying dynamic difficulty adjustment agent by integrating player state models into monte-carlo tree search, Expert Systems with Applications 205 (2022) 117677. 18 M. Crippa, P. L. Lanzi, F. Marocchi, An analysis of single-player monte carlo tree search performance in sokoban, Expert Systems with Applications 192 (2022) 116224. Y. Fu, S. Li, Y. Qi, Amazon game system design and realization based on staged uct algorithm, in: 2018 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 5929–5932. R. A. Fisher, The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems, Annals of Eugenics 7 (1936) 179–188. B. Jianbo, D. Meng, Q. Yizhong, F. Yao, et al., Design of amazon chess evaluation function based on reinforcement learning, in: 2019 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 6330–6333. D. Kagkas, D. Karamichailidou, A. Alexandridis, Chess position evaluation using radial basis function neural net-works, Complexity 2023 (2023) 7143943. C.-H. Hsueh, K. Ikeda, Improvement of move naturalness for playing good-quality games with middle-level players, Applied Intelligence 54 (2024) 1637–1655. G. Zhang, X. Chen, R. Chang, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Bai, J. Wang, C. Xu, Mastering the game of amazons fast by decoupling network learning, in: 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8. C. Burns, P. Izmailov, J. H. Kirchner, B. Baker, L. Gao, L. Aschenbrenner, Y. Chen, A. Ecoffet, M. Joglekar, J. Leike, I. Sutskever, J. Wu, Weak-to-strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision, in: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR, 2024, pp. 4971–5012. U. Michelucci, An Introduction to Autoencoders, arXiv e-prints (2022) arXiv:2201.03898. doi: doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2201.03898 . arXiv:2201.03898 .D. Bank, N. Koenigstein, R. Giryes, Autoencoders, Machine learning for data science handbook: data mining and knowledge discovery handbook (2023) 353–374. P. Veliˇ ckovi´ c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, Graph attention networks, 2018. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903 . arXiv:1710.10903 .J. Lieberum, An evaluation function for the game of amazons, Theoretical computer science 349 (2005) 230–244. OpenAI, Gpt-4o mini: advancing cost-efficient intelligence, 2024. C. F. Hayes, M. Reymond, D. M. Roijers, E. Howley, P. Mannion, Monte carlo tree search algorithms for risk-aware and multi-objective reinforcement learning, 2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13032 .

arXiv:2211.13032 .A. Grover, J. Leskovec, node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2016, p. 855–864. URL: https: //doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939754 . doi: doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939754 .M. G. Altarabichi, S. Nowaczyk, S. Pashami, P. S. Mashhadi, Fast genetic algorithm for feature selection — a qualitative approximation approach, Expert Systems with Applications 211 (2023) 118528. URL: http://dx. doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.118528 . doi: doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2022.118528 .G. Pongthanisorn, G. Capi, Genetic algorithm-based data optimization for efficient transfer learning in convolutional neural networks: A brain–machine interface implementation, Robotics 13 (2024). URL: https://www.mdpi. com/2218-6581/13/1/14 . doi: doi: 10.3390/robotics13010014 .M. Nadas, L. Diosan, A. Tomescu, Synthetic data generation using large language models: Advances in text and code, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14023 . arXiv:2503.14023 .Y. Chen, N. Xi, Y. Du, H. Wang, J. Chen, S. Zhao, B. Qin, From artificially real to real: Leveraging pseudo data from large language models for low-resource molecule discovery, 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309. 05203 . arXiv:2309.05203 .19 Appendix 

A. Case Study 

> Table A.2: Case Study of Data Generation

INPUT 

[string ]: Board information 

[chess ]: "white" or "black" 

[target ]: 1 if chess== "white" else 2 

[step [0]] : Position of chess to move 

[step [1]] : Position of chess to reach 

[put ]: Position of obstacle to place 

PROMPT 

Amazon is a two-player abstract strategy game that combines elements of strategy and board games. Below are the basic rules of Amazon: 

1.Board and Pieces 

Board: Amazon is played on a 10×10 grid. Pieces: Each player has four “Amazons”, typically distinguished by color (e.g., White vs. Black). 

2.Objective 

Players aim to occupy as much space as possible by moving their Amazons and firing arrows, while simultane-ously blocking the opponent’s mobility. 

3.Rules of Play 

Initial Setup: Each player’s four Amazons are placed on predetermined squares of the first and last ranks. Turn Sequence: Players alternate turns. On your turn, you perform two actions in order: Move: Choose one of your Amazons and move it along any straight line—horizontal, vertical, or diagonal—for any number of empty squares, without jumping over other pieces. Shoot: After moving, choose a target square along another straight line from that Amazon’s new location; that square becomes permanently blocked and cannot be occupied or traversed. Restrictions: You may not move into or shoot at squares that are already occupied or already blocked. 

4.Additional Rule 

Players must ensure they follow the movement and shooting rules at every step. Please review the above rules. Now you are a professional Amazon player, and the current position is: 

[string ]

Here, 1 represents White Amazons, 2 represents Black Amazons, and 3 represents blocked squares. You are to evaluate the move just played by player [chess] (ID [target]): they moved the Amazon with index [step[0]] to square [step[1]], then place an obstacle at [put]. Based on both the current and potential future positions, score this turn using two values (each between 0 and 1): 

[move _score place _score ]

A score closer to 1 favors the player; closer to 0 favors the opponent. Please output exactly the above format and no other text. 

OUTPUT 

[move _score ]: The evaluation score of movement given by LLMs. 

[place _score ]: The evaluation score of placement given by LLMs. 20