Title: ODUTQA-MDC: A Task for Open-Domain Underspecified Tabular QA with Multi-turn Dialogue-based Clarification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10159v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 00:37:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# ODUTQA-MDC: A Task for Open-Domain Underspecified Tabular QA with Multi-turn Dialogue-based Clarification 

Zhensheng Wang 1,2 , Zhanteng Lin 3, Wenmian Yang 2,† , Kun Zhou 1,2 , Yiquan Zhang 2, Weijia Jia 2,4 

> 1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, PR China 

> 2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai, PR China 

> 3

Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai, PR China 

> 4

Beijing Normal-Hong Kong Baptist University, Zhuhai, PR China 

{jensenwang, zhantenglin, zhoukun}@mail.bnu.edu.cn, {wenmianyang, jiawj}@bnu.edu.cn, zhangyq987@hotmail.com 

Abstract 

The advancement of large language models (LLMs) has enhanced tabular question answer-ing (Tabular QA), yet they struggle with open-domain queries exhibiting underspecified or uncertain expressions. To address this, we introduce the ODUTQA-MDC task and the first comprehensive benchmark to tackle it. This benchmark includes: (1) a large-scale ODUTQA dataset with 209 tables and 25,105 QA pairs; (2) a fine-grained labeling scheme for detailed evaluation; and (3) a dynamic clar-ification interface that simulates user feedback for interactive assessment. We also propose MAIC-TQA, a multi-agent framework that ex-cels at detecting ambiguities, clarifying them through dialogue, and refining answers. Exper-iments validate our benchmark and framework, establishing them as a key resource for advanc-ing conversational, underspecification-aware Tabular QA research. The data and code are available at https://github.com/jensenw1/ ODUTQA-MDC .

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have driven sig-nificant progress in open-domain tabular question answering (Tabular QA). Distinct from closed-domain settings where the target table is predeter-mined, the open-domain paradigm necessitates au-tonomously retrieving relevant tables from a large-scale database (Fang et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024; Rai et al., 2023). However, existing text-to-SQL ap-proaches often falter when applied to this pipeline, as real-world user queries are frequently underspec-ified due to spelling errors, unclear expressions, or incomplete information. Such ambiguity funda-mentally hinders the generation of correct SQL queries, leading to inaccurate answers. Existing research on this problem, while valu-able, often remain limited to closed-domain scenar-ios that focus merely on detecting and classifying 

> †

Corresponding author. SELECT FROM WHERE     

> SELECT FROM WHERE
> SELECT FROM WHERE
> SELECT FROM WHERE
> Q3: What is the greenery rate of the Vanke Light of the Future community?
> Q1: What is the greenery rate of the Vanke Light of the Future community in Bao'an District, Shenzhen?
> Q2: How is the environment of the Vanke Light of the Future community in Bao'an District, Shenzhen?
> Q4: What is the greenery rate of the Vanke community in Bao'an District, Shenzhen?

Figure 1: Examples of underspecified input causing questions to be unanswerable. 

underspecifications (Bhaskar et al., 2023). These approaches do not resolve the core challenge: gen-erating correct answers without user clarification. Even conversational datasets like PRACTIQ (Dong et al., 2025) rely on predetermined, static dialogues, failing to capture the dynamic and unpredictable nature of real-world user interactions. Real-world open-domain Tabular QA presents several core challenges that current methods do not address: autonomously selecting relevant tables from large databases, handling queries with multi-ple types of underspecification simultaneously, and generating accurate answers by integrating infor-mation gathered over users’ multi-turn clarification dialogues (Liu et al., 2025). Progress has been limited by the absence of suitable datasets and eval-uation frameworks designed for these complexities. To address these gaps, we introduce ODUTQA-MDC, a new task for Open-Domain Underspeci-fied Tabular Question Answering with Multi-turn Dialogue-based Clarification. The task is supported by three components: a large-scale dataset, a fine-grained labeling scheme, and a simulated clarifi-cation interface. We construct ODUTQA, the first dedicated open-domain underspecified Tabular QA dataset, with 209 structured tables and 25,105 QA pairs from property, real estate finance, and land auction domains. To align with text-to-SQL work-

> arXiv:2604.10159v1 [cs.CL] 11 Apr 2026

flows, we categorize underspecifications by their correspondence with SQL structures: table-scope underspecification (impacting the FROM clause; see Figure 1-Q3), query-intent underspecification (affecting the SELECT clause; see Figure 1-Q2), query-condition underspecification (affecting the WHERE clause; see Figure 1-Q4), and mixed un-derspecification. For a nuanced evaluation, our framework intro-duces fine-grained underspecification detection la-bels. Building on intent and slot labels from spoken language understanding, following previous work (Wang et al., 2025), we define three auxiliary de-tection labels: intent underspecification (identified via binary classification), scope underspecification, and condition underspecification (both using triple-based annotations for content, category, and error type). To simulate practical interactions, we inte-grate a conversational agent that dynamically gener-ates clarification based only on the underspecifica-tions detected by the system. This establishes a dy-namic “detection-clarification-redetection” closed-loop evaluation process, realistically simulating multi-turn interactions and enabling a rigorous as-sessment of a system’s ability to handle ambiguity. Building on this task, dataset, and evalua-tion framework, we introduce MAIC-TQA, an LLM-powered Multi-Agent Interactive Clarifica-tion framework for ODUTQA-MDC. MAIC-TQA comprises four collaborative agents: the Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) module, Scope Validator Agent, Table Retrieval Agent, and SQL Generation and Validation Agent. Working in con-cert, these agents deliver end-to-end, dynamic tab-ular QA with multi-turn clarification. The frame-work leverages external SQL tools and integrates execution feedback, such as SQL errors and empty results, to drive effective underspecification detec-tion, adaptive clarification, and robust reasoning. Throughout the workflow, the system dynamically solicits clarifications, incorporates user responses, and iteratively refines both understanding and re-trieval. By jointly optimizing underspecification identification and QA accuracy, MAIC-TQA estab-lishes the first comprehensive agent-based bench-mark for open-domain underspecified tabular QA with interactive, multi-turn dialogue. The main contributions of this paper are as fol-lows: • We introduce the novel task of Open-Domain Underspecified Tabular QA with Multi-turn Dialogue-based Clarification, supported by the first corresponding dataset (ODUTQA), detailed detection labels, and a dynamic con-versational clarification interface. • We propose an agent-based open-domain Tab-ular QA system capable of effectively identi-fying and dynamically clarifying underspeci-fications through intelligent multi-turn inter-actions, substantially enhancing system adapt-ability in complex scenarios. • We systematically evaluate mainstream LLMs’ underspecification detection and QA perfor-mance on our dataset, presenting the first benchmark that comprehensively assesses the entire “information detection–multi-turn clari-fication–QA reasoning" workflow, facilitating further development in this research area. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 TQA Datasets 

Mainstream Text-to-SQL datasets, such as Spi-der (Yu et al., 2018), WikiSQL (Zhong et al., 2017), and Open-WikiTable (Kweon et al., 2023), rarely consider underspecification in user queries. RETQA (Wang et al., 2025) provides SLU an-notations but does not address underspecification. More recent datasets introduce underspecification via schema modification (Bhaskar et al., 2023), multi-turn dialogue (Dong et al., 2025), or human annotation (Saparina and Lapata, 2024). However, these datasets remain simplistic, lack systematic clarification annotation, and do not capture com-plex real-world mismatches between queries and database schemas. A detailed comparison of the datasets is provided in Table 1. 

2.2 TQA Methods 

Existing methods address open-domain TQA and underspecification separately. SLUTQA (Wang et al., 2025) enhances LLMs with intent-based ex-ample selection but does not resolve underspecifi-cation. PURPLE (Ren et al., 2024) prunes schema using a Steiner Tree approach, while LogicalBeam (Bhaskar et al., 2023) generates diverse SQL tem-plates, though both have limited flexibility and coverage. Most importantly, current TQA meth-ods lack error identification and dynamic conversa-tional clarification, limiting their effectiveness in real-world underspecified scenarios. Dataset Open Domain Underspecification Mixed Underspecification QA Evaluation Conversational Dynamic Clarification Spider % % % ! % %                              

> RETQA !%%!%%
> PRACTIQ %!%%!%
> AmbiQT !!%!%%
> Ambrosia !!%%%%
> ODUTQA !!!!!!
> Table 1: Dataset comparison. “Open Domain” indicates table retrieval from a large corpus, whereas “Closed Domain” (marked with ‘ %’) specifies QA on given tables.

3 Task Construction and Analysis 

3.1 Task Definition 

The ODUTQA-MDC task evaluates open-domain tabular QA systems on their ability to resolve query ambiguities via multi-turn clarification. Given a user query and a multi-table database, the task con-sists of two stages: • Underspecification Detection: Identifying the specific ambiguity type within the query (i.e., SELECT, FROM, WHERE, or Mixed). • Clarification-based Dynamic QA: Interact-ing with a user simulator to resolve detected ambiguities, followed by standard Table Re-trieval and SQL Generation to derive the final answer. 

3.2 Datasets Construction 3.2.1 Data Source 

Our dataset originates from RETQA (Wang et al., 2025), a specified, open-domain QA dataset with 90 question templates, covering the Land Auction, Property, and Real Estate Finance domains. To support the four defined underspecification types (table-scope, query-intent, query-condition, and mixed), the original tables are normalized. Prop-erty and Land Auction tables are reorganized by city into 102 tables (avg. 1,040.37 rows) and 103 tables (avg. 30.35 rows), respectively. The four fi-nance tables are consolidated by year (2019–2022), each averaging 444.75 rows. All resulting tables are stored in a PostgreSQL database (Stonebraker et al., 2019) to simulate realistic tabular QA scenar-ios. 

3.2.2 Template Design and QA Pair Generation 

To construct a dataset of underspecified queries, we adapt 90 seed templates from RETQA, each associ-ating a natural language question with a correspond-ing SQL query. Rather than altering the database schema, our core strategy injects underspecifica-tion by manipulating the question templates and their assigned values. We begin with a detailed manual analysis, map-ping each template variable to its SQL clause coun-terpart. This process connects variables to table captions (affecting the FROM clause), column headers (impacting the SELECT clause and defin-ing user intent), and query conditions (appearing in the WHERE clause). This mapping informs two distinct strategies for introducing underspecification. The first, template restructuring, modifies the templates themselves to induce SELECT clause underspecification and cre-ate the Missing type for the FROM clause. The sec-ond, value modification, alters values in generated QA pairs to create WHERE clause underspecifica-tion and to produce the Unmatch and Error types for the FROM clause. These strategies yield three distinct categories of underspecification. • SELECT Underspecification Generation: 

This arises from an insufficiently specified user intent, making it difficult to identify the target column. To induce this, we replace explicit column references in templates with vague expressions. For instance, "green cov-erage ratio" is reformulated as “how is the en-vironment?”, while a question regarding “risk level” is modified to “how is the business sta-tus?”. All original headers are preserved in a SELECT-Clarification dictionary for subse-quent resolution. • FROM Underspecification Generation: 

This results from missing or incorrect scope-defining information, hindering table identi-fication. It is introduced two ways. Missing-type underspecification is generated at the template level by omitting variables such as “city” or “district”. Error-type (typos) and Unmatch-type (logical conflicts, e.g., a non-existent city-district pair) are introduced by modifying values post-generation. All orig-inal, correct information is recorded in a FROM-Clarification dictionary. • WHERE Underspecification Generation: 

This occurs when incomplete or erroneous conditions hinder accurate data matching. We simulate this by post-processing QA pairs, re-placing lengthy proper nouns (e.g., project names) with natural abbreviations from a few-shot prompted LLM. After creating a name-to-abbreviation map, we systematically re-place the proper nouns in the questions. All original full names are stored in a WHERE-Clarification dictionary for downstream use. From the initial 90 templates, we identify 76 that are suitable for underspecification injection. These are systematically expanded into 222 extended tem-plates, each incorporating diverse underspecifica-tion patterns in the SELECT and FROM clauses. Throughout this process, the corresponding target SQL template remains unchanged, as it represents the definitive query intent once underspecification is resolved. To ensure data quality, we sample two QA pairs per template for rigorous manual review against criteria of fluency, consistency, underspecification preservation, and annotation correctness. Tem-plates are iteratively revised until they meet these standards. In the generation stage, validated templates are populated with sampled database entities, yield-ing 63,496 initial QA pairs. We then perform stratified sampling using the 76 template groups as strata, since templates naturally define dis-tinct query structures and underspecification pat-terns and therefore provide an appropriate unit for controlling data balance. During this pro-cess, we further apply quality-control filters be-fore and after SQL execution to remove cases that are unsuitable for an answerable QA bench-mark. We then sample according to per-group tar-get counts to achieve a balanced distribution across well-specified, single-underspecified, and mixed-underspecified examples. This procedure produces a final dataset of 25,105 QA pairs, including 5,095 well-specified, 7,892 single-underspecified (‘SE-LECT‘: 197; ‘FROM‘: 3,274; ‘WHERE‘: 4,421), and 12,118 mixed-underspecified instances. The data is split 6:2:2 into training (14,973), validation (5,046), and test (5,086) sets (see Appendix A.7). To further enhance linguistic naturalness, we paraphrase questions with an LLM. Given our dataset’s focus on underspecification, we use prompt engineering to explicitly prohibit the LLM from using forbidden words, namely, column head-ers specified in the SELECT-Clarification dictio-nary, thus preventing underspecified expressions from being made explicit. See Appendix A.3 for details. 

3.3 Label Annotation 

To support fine-grained analysis and evaluation of underspecification, we design a unified annotation scheme comprising two main categories: labels for spoken language understanding (SLU) (Xing et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2025) and labels for underspecifi-cation detection. Specifically, following previous work (Wang et al., 2025), we employ a template-filling approach to synthesize the dataset, where all corresponding annotations are automatically in-ferred during the generation process. More details of label generation are provided in Appendix A. 

3.3.1 Intent and Slot Annotation 

For SLU, we annotate both intent and slot infor-mation for each question. Specifically, following previous work (Wang et al., 2025), each seed tem-plate is assigned one or more intent labels. In cases where underspecification is introduced through the SELECT clause, the intent is annotated as “Un-known” to reflect uncertainty in user intent. Slot annotation adopts the standard BIO (Begin, Inside, Outside) format. Variables within question templates are treated as slots, with their types de-fined by the corresponding variable names, while all other tokens are labeled as “O”. 

3.3.2 Underspecification Type Annotation 

In addition to standard annotations, our dataset de-fines three auxiliary underspecification detection labels: intent underspecification, scope underspec-ification, and condition underspecification, as fol-lows: • Intent Underspecification Label: This bi-nary label indicates whether a query exhibits intent underspecification. It is assigned as “True” if the user intent is unclear (i.e., with “unknown” intent label ), and “False” if the user intent is clear (i.e., with specific intent labels). • Scope Underspecification Label: This la-bel employs a triple-based annotation format [“slot_content”, “slot_type”, “error_type”], capturing errors related to table scope. For example, if a query omits the required “City” slot, the label is [“”, “City”, “Missing”]. The possible values for “error_type” are as fol-lows: 

– Missing : A required slot is absent from the query. 

– Error : The slot content cannot be found in the database. 

– Unmatch : The individual slot values are valid, but their combination does not ex-ist in the database. These labels directly determine whether the correct database table can be identified and serve as explicit signals for triggering system clarification. • Condition Underspecification Label: This label addresses underspecifications in the WHERE clause, particularly cases where a provided entity name (such as a project or en-terprise) does not exist in the database. In such instances, the system generates a triplet [“slot_content”, “slot_type”, “not exist”], for example, [“ABC Technology Inc.”, “enter-prise name”, “not exist”]. This enables the system to explicitly identify invalid query con-ditions and initiate targeted clarification or correction. 

3.4 Conversational Clarification Interface 

To overcome the limitations of prior work that fo-cuses on static underspecification classification, we introduce an automated interactive user simulator that resolves underspecified queries through multi-turn clarification dialogues. This design choice ad-dresses a critical practical constraint: while human interaction provides high realism, it is prohibitively expensive and lacks consistency and reproducibil-ity at scale. Our simulator offers a scalable and standardized alternative that preserves sufficient linguistic realism for robust evaluation. The simulator is implemented as a callable Python interface for handling SELECT, FROM, and WHERE underspecification types. Clarifica-tion is strictly gated by detection accuracy: cor-rective information is provided only when the pre-dicted underspecification label matches the ground truth; otherwise, no clarification is revealed. Upon correct detection, the interface retrieves the cor-responding ground-truth value from clarification dictionaries. This value is inserted into a standard-ized response template. To emulate natural user interactions, an LLM is employed to paraphrase these templates into col-loquial expressions. To guarantee reliability, we implement a rigorous post-generation verification mechanism. Specifically, the system validates that the ground-truth value retrieved from the dictionary remains invariant within the paraphrased response. If the value is missing, the system regenerates the response; if regeneration fails after a fixed num-ber of attempts, it falls back to the standardized template. This design ensures linguistic diversity without sacrificing factual accuracy. To support diverse benchmarking, the interface offers two modes: Dynamic Mode generates varied responses to assess robustness under realistic con-ditions, while Fixed Mode delivers standardized responses for reproducibility. See Appendix A.5 for implementation details and Appendix A.6 for the design rationale. 

4 Method 

4.1 Overview 

As illustrated in Figure 2, the MAIC-TQA frame-work adopts a modular, multi-agent architecture to address open-domain underspecified tabular ques-tion answering with multi-turn clarification. The workflow proceeds as follows: First, the SLU Mod-ule (Section 4.2) extracts user intent and slot infor-mation from the natural language query. Next, the Scope Validator Agent (Section 4.3) verifies and, if necessary, requests clarification for caption-related slots to ensure accurate table scope identification. The Table Retrieval Agent (Section 4.4) then inte-grates the original query and user clarifications to determine the most relevant table caption. Finally, the SQL Generation and Validation Agent (Sec-tion 4.5) constructs and executes the SQL query, validating the output to generate the final answer. 

4.2 SLU Module 

Given a user’s natural language query, we first em-ploy a BERT-based classifier (Devlin et al., 2019) for intent detection and slot filling (Qin et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2023). An intent underspecification label is generated based on the classifier’s output. If intent underspecification is detected, the system How is the environment of  the Tomorrow  City community in Nanjing?  

> Your input is unclear, please clarify your request further.

BERT Intent 

Slots 

Agent 

> [“”, “District”, “Missing” ]
> Summary

Related  Tables 

> Table captions

BM25 

Agent 

> Tool
> Candidate Prompts

Intent Prompt 

Agent 

> Candidate Prompts

Intent 

Prompt    

> Tool
> Null
> How is the environment of the
> Tomorrow City community in Nanjing?
> Query

Stage 1. SLU Module 

Stage 2. SV Agent 

Dialog 

Domain 

Slot Types 

> Query

Slots 

Domain 

> You are a Scope Validator Agent. Please use the provided information to call tools for slot validation and classify the slots accordingly. (...)
> Table captions

Dialog 

Domain 

Slots 

Related Tables 

Stage 3. TR Agent 

Stage 4. SGV Agent 

Dialog       

> This community is located in Xuanwu District, Nanjing.
> You did not provide the correct
> district name. The community "Tomorrow City" could not be found, please confirm if the
> community name is correct. The floor area ratio of Forte Tomorrow City is 3.33.
> I want to query the floor area ratio.
> The community name should be Forte Tomorrow City. ["Tomorrow City", project_name, "not exist"]
> ["Forte Tomorrow City", floor_area_ratio, 3.33 ]

Figure 2: General framework of MAIC-TQA. 

issues a template-based follow-up question (e.g., “Your input is unclear. Please clarify your request.”) to prompt user clarification. Upon receiving the user’s response, the system concatenates the origi-nal query with the clarification to form an updated conversational context, which is then reprocessed by the BERT classifier for a second attempt at in-tent recognition. Once a valid intent is identified, the system proceeds to slot validation. To main-tain interaction efficiency, the clarification loop is restricted to a single iteration. For downstream processing, clarified intent la-bels are mapped to one of three domains, i.e., Prop-erty Sales, Land Auctions, or Enterprise Finance, as the domain labels for subsequent tasks. 

4.3 Scope Validator Agent 

The primary function of the Scope Validator Agent (SV Agent) is to verify the scope information in user queries, enabling accurate table matching. Scope information is typically represented by slot annotations; therefore, the agent receives the user’s original query, the domain label, the slot labels, and the list of domain-required slots as input. The validation process begins by checking for missing slots. The agent compares the extracted slots against the required slot types for the given domain. If a required slot is missing, the agent immediately assigns a scope underspecification la-bel with “Missing” as the error_type , following the specified prompt. For example, if the “District” slot is absent, the output triplet would be (“”, “District”, “Missing”), as shown in Figure 2. If all required slots are present, the agent pro-ceeds to verify the validity of the provided slot values. This is accomplished by calling a valida-tion function, which cross-references the input slot values with the corresponding database tables for the specified domain, based on a detailed prompt. If any slot value fails validation (e.g., the content does not exist or the slot combination is invalid), the agent generates the appropriate Scope Under-specification Label and prompts the user for clarifi-cation. This two-stage validation process ensures both the completeness and the correctness of scope in-formation, facilitating robust and accurate table selection. The detailed prompt templates and vali-dation functions used by this agent are provided in Appendix D. 

4.4 Table Retrieval Agent 

The Table Retrieval Agent (TR Agent) generates a concise summary of the target table based on the user’s original query and the supplementary infor-mation collected by the Scope Validator Agent. It analyzes the complete dialogue history, identifying system prompts for clarification and correspond-ing user responses. According to the previously predicted intent label, the agent selects different representative examples as context for in-context learning. It then integrates information from both the initial query and the clarifications to produce a table summary, which serves as the predicted table caption. Table retrieval follows a two-stage process. First, the system attempts to find an exact match between the generated summary and the table captions in the database. If there is no exact match, the system performs a similarity search using the BM25 algo-rithm (Robertson and Zaragoza, 2009). If the agent cannot generate a summary due to insufficient dia-logue information, the full dialogue history is used directly for BM25 retrieval. This approach ensures robust table retrieval in all cases. The detailed prompt templates used by this agent are provided in Appendix D. 

4.5 SQL Generation and Validation Agent 

After table retrieval, the SQL Generation and Vali-dation Agent (SGV Agent) is responsible for gen-erating and validating SQL queries. The agent takes four inputs: the complete dialogue history, the predicted domain, the extracted slots, and the related table captions. Guided by the user’s intent, the agent selects an appropriate prompt template containing five representative gold SQL examples for in-context learning, and then generates and exe-cutes the SQL query accordingly. If the query is successful and meets all user re-quirements, the system returns the final SQL query and result, completing the task. If the result is empty or incomplete (e.g., only a subset of the requested entities is returned), the agent calls a pre-defined SQL validation function to identify missing conditions, generates a condition underspecifica-tion label, and requests clarification from the user. This clarification is appended to the dialogue his-tory to form an updated context for a single round of SQL regeneration. If the new query still fails or returns no results, the process ends, and the empty output is recorded as the final result. Details of the prompt templates and the SQL validation function are provided in Appendix D. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Tasks and Baselines 

We utilize ODUTQA-MDC as the benchmark for open-domain underspecified tabular question an-swering, which consists of two sub-tasks: (i) un-derspecification detection, including intent, scope, and condition detection, and (ii) clarification-based dynamic QA that evaluates a system’s ability to resolve underspecified queries through interaction. As this benchmark explicitly targets clarification-aware reasoning over incomplete user inputs, there are no directly comparable prior systems that jointly model underspecification detection and clarification-driven query execution in tabular set-tings. For comparative evaluation, we implement MAIC-TQA together with a state-of-the-art tab-ular QA framework, SLUTQA (Wang et al., 2025), which does not employ clarification and instead answers directly from underspecified queries, serv-ing as a clarification-free baseline. For MAIC-TQA, we evaluate both fixed and dynamic clarifi-cation responses, where all dynamic responses are generated by Qwen2.5-72B for consistency. The SGV Agent is responsible for SQL generation and execution, taking the complete dialogue history, predicted domain, extracted slots, and table cap-tions as input; guided by user intent, it selects a prompt template with five gold SQL examples for in-context learning and generates the executable query. We support both MAIC-TQA and SLUTQA using LLM backbones with function-calling ca-pabilities, including open-source Qwen3 32B and Qwen3 30B (A3B)(Yang et al., 2025) deployed via SGLang(Zheng et al., 2024) with default chain-of-thought, and closed-source Kimi K2 (Team et al., 2025), GLM 4 (GLM et al., 2024), and Doubao (Seed 1.6 flash-250828) accessed through official APIs with default settings. Additional details are provided in Appendix B.2 and C. 

5.2 Implementation 

This section presents the evaluation metrics and im-plementation details for the two core tasks defined in Section 3.4: Underspecification Detection and Clarification-based Dynamic QA. 

Evaluation Metrics For the Underspecification Detection task, we adopt Accuracy and macro F1-score to assess the model’s ability to detect intent, scope, and condition underspecifications. Accu-racy is calculated on the entire dataset, while F1 is reported specifically for underspecified queries. For the Clarification-based Dynamic QA task, evaluation is divided into two sub-tasks: (1) Ta-ble Retrieval, evaluated using F1 score; and (2) SQL Generation, assessed by Execution Correct-Fixed Clarification Dynamic Clarification                                                                                           

> Model SELECT FROM WHERE Mixed FROM WHERE Mixed Acc. F1 Acc. F1 Acc. F1 Acc. Acc. F1 Acc. F1 Acc. BERT 99.78 99.22 ––––––––––Qwen3 32B ––77.66 82.82 69.59 66.02 54.96 78.78 85.11 73.81 72.49 59.42 Qwen3 30B ––75.17 85.10 75.67 78.99 58.55 69.95 77.45 72.49 69.50 52.92 Kimi K2 ––82.60 87.95 69.02 65.54 55.51 81.63 87.31 64.81 59.55 52.69 GLM 4 ––81.10 86.71 44.77 28.96 37.97 78.55 84.39 57.02 53.41 46.23 Doubao ––81.36 89.46 73.72 75.69 61.21 81.22 89.23 83.59 84.38 68.50

Table 2: Overall performance of underspecification detection under fixed and dynamic clarification settings.                                                 

> Model Method
> Table Retrieval SQL Generation
> F1 ECR Pass@1 Qwen3 32B SLUTQA 60.07 85.90 24.20 Ours (Fix) 92.89 97.46 57.44 Ours (Dyn) 93.48 98.13 57.89
> Qwen3 30B SLUTQA 58.78 86.75 21.22 Ours (Fix) 95.10 96.32 54.11
> Ours (Dyn) 91.17 97.56 49.55 Kimi-K2 SLUTQA 62.33 88.35 30.70 Ours (Fix) 95.07 98.26 63.89
> Ours (Dyn) 97.13 98.39 59.86 GLM 4 SLUTQA 60.15 85.51 25.75 Ours (Fix) 89.89 85.88 32.47 Ours (Dyn) 89.28 88.84 44.63
> Doubao SLUTQA 59.95 78.52 23.72 Ours (Fix) 77.40 90.81 41.54 Ours (Dyn) 93.43 97.56 53.23

Table 3: Table retrieval and SQL generation results (“Fix”/“Dyn”: Fixed/Dynamic clarification). 

ness Rate (ECR) and Pass@1. ECR denotes the proportion of generated SQL statements that can be executed without error, while Pass@1 measures the proportion of cases where the execution result of the generated SQL exactly matches the gold standard result. For SLUTQA, BERT parameters are loaded directly from the officially released pre-trained model. For our method, BERT is fine-tuned on the ODUTQA training set. All LLM API calls follow their respective official default settings. De-tailed performance of the SLU Module is provided in Appendix B.1. 

5.3 Results and Discussions 

In this section, we present the experimental results and analysis. The results of the ablation study are shown in Appendix B.3. For the underspecification detection task, we evaluate model performance on three types corre-sponding to SQL clauses: intent (SELECT), scope (FROM), and condition (WHERE). As summarized in Table 2, the BERT-based approach achieves strong results in both Accuracy and F1 score for intent underspecification. For scope underspecifi-cation, Kimi-K2 achieves the highest accuracy in both dynamic and fixed scenarios, while Doubao Seed 1.6 achieves the highest F1 score in both sce-narios. For condition underspecification, Qwen3 30B A3B achieves the highest accuracy and F1 score in the fixed scenario, whereas Doubao Seed 1.6 achieves the highest accuracy and F1 score in the dynamic scenario. The mixed underspecifica-tion task proves extremely challenging due to an error accumulation effect, where failing to detect a single problem type leads to an overall incorrect prediction. Despite this difficulty, Doubao Seed 1.6 achieves the highest accuracy for this task across both dynamic and fixed scenarios. In table retrieval, our method demonstrates ro-bust performance across all models, as reported in Table 3. This gain is primarily attributed to our method’s ability to proactively identify missing key information, such as table captions, and to elicit necessary details via follow-up questions, resulting in more precise retrieval. For SQL generation, our method demonstrates superior performance on all models, as shown in Table 3. Specifically, on Doubao Seed 1.6, our method achieves execution compliance rate (ECR) improvements of 12.29% and 19.04% over SLUTQA in the fixed and dynamic scenarios, re-spectively. Furthermore, on the Pass@1 metric, which more accurately captures intent alignment, our method achieves substantial improvements of 33.24% and 33.69% on Qwen3 32B for the fixed and dynamic scenarios, respectively, which further underscores the necessity of clarification mecha-nisms for handling underspecified problems in ta-ble QA. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce ODUTQA-MDC, a new task for open-domain underspecified tabular question answering with multi-turn clarification. We provide three resources to support evaluation: ODUTQA, the first large-scale underspecified tab-ular QA dataset; a fine-grained underspecification labeling scheme; and a dynamic clarification inter-face. We further propose MAIC-TQA, an LLM-based agent framework that combines adaptive un-derspecification detection with iterative clarifica-tion. Extensive experiments benchmark diverse LLMs and baselines, delivering the first unified evaluation of underspecification detection, clarifi-cation, and end-to-end QA, and establishing foun-dational benchmarks for underspecification-aware tabular QA. 

Limitations 

While our proposed framework offers significant advancements in handling underspecified user queries, we acknowledge specific boundaries in our experimental design regarding the scope of ambiguity, interaction modeling, and domain cov-erage. Regarding the dataset and SQL complexity, ODUTQA-MDC focuses strictly on informational underspecification within the SELECT, FROM, and WHERE clauses, intentionally excluding complex aggregations (e.g., GROUP BY or HAVING) and open-ended linguistic ambiguities. This scoping is a deliberate design choice to isolate and rigorously evaluate the model’s ability to perform logical clar-ification mapping without the confounding factors of linguistic noise or advanced compositional rea-soning, which would obscure the core clarification mechanism in a controlled study. Concerning the evaluation paradigm, our user simulator prioritizes logical consistency and factu-ality over the full spectrum of human behavioral stochasticity, such as irrelevant chitchat or dynamic goal deviations. While this reduces the chaotic na-ture of real-world interactions, it is critical for es-tablishing a reproducible benchmark. By minimiz-ing interaction noise, we ensure that performance differences can be attributed solely to the model’s capacity to resolve logical ambiguities rather than its robustness to open-domain distractions, thus serving as a standardized framework for this spe-cific capability. Finally, with respect to domain generalizabil-ity, our current experiments are centered on the real estate market, a vertical characterized by dense attributes and user constraints. However, the proposed framework is designed to be schema-agnostic, with clarification logic grounded in uni-versal SQL syntax rather than domain-specific rules. Therefore, despite the single-domain dataset, the underlying methodology for detecting and re-solving underspecification remains methodologi-cally generalizable to other vertical industries such as healthcare or e-commerce. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) un-der Grant 62272050 and the grant of Beijing Normal- Hong Kong Baptist University sponsored by Guangdong Provincial Department of Educa-tion; in part by Zhuhai Science-Tech Innovation Bureau under Grant No. 2320004002772 and the Interdisciplinary Intelligence Super Computer Cen-ter of Beijing Normal University (Zhuhai). 

References       

> Adithya Bhaskar, Tushar Tomar, Ashutosh Sathe, and Sunita Sarawagi. 2023. Benchmarking and improv-ing text-to-sql generation under ambiguity. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 , pages 7053–7074. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ziyang Chen, Jinzhi Liao, and Xiang Zhao. 2023. Multi-granularity temporal question answering over knowl-edge graphs. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , pages 11378–11392. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. An-Chieh Cheng, Hongxu Yin, Yang Fu, Qiushan Guo, Ruihan Yang, Jan Kautz, Xiaolong Wang, and Sifei Liu. 2024. Spatialrgpt: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision-language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Confer-ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Lizhi Cheng, Wenmian Yang, and Weijia Jia. 2023. A scope sensitive and result attentive model for multi-intent spoken language understanding. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,pages 12691–12699. AAAI Press. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,

pages 4171–4186. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mingwen Dong, Nischal Ashok Kumar, Yiqun Hu, Anuj Chauhan, Chung-Wei Hang, Shuaichen Chang, Lin Pan, Wuwei Lan, Henghui Zhu, Jiarong Jiang, Patrick Ng, and Zhiguo Wang. 2025. PRACTIQ: A practical conversational text-to-sql dataset with ambiguous and unanswerable queries. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies, NAACL 2025 - Volume 1: Long Papers, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, April 29 - May 4, 2025 , pages 255–273. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xi Fang, Weijie Xu, Fiona Anting Tan, Jiani Zhang, Ziqing Hu, Yanjun Qi, Scott Nickleach, Diego Socol-insky, Srinivasan H. Sengamedu, and Christos Falout-sos. 2024. Large language models(llms) on tabular data: Prediction, generation, and understanding - A survey. CoRR , abs/2402.17944. Team GLM, Aohan Zeng, Bin Xu, and Bowen Wang et al. 2024. Chatglm: A family of large language models from glm-130b to glm-4 all tools. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.12793. Kezhi Kong, Jiani Zhang, Zhengyuan Shen, Balasub-ramaniam Srinivasan, Chuan Lei, Christos Falout-sos, Huzefa Rangwala, and George Karypis. 2024. Opentab: Advancing large language models as open-domain table reasoners. CoRR , abs/2402.14361. Sunjun Kweon, Yeonsu Kwon, Seonhee Cho, Yohan Jo, and Edward Choi. 2023. Open-wikitable : Dataset for open domain question answering with complex reasoning over table. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , pages 8285–8297. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Zeming Liu, Haifeng Wang, Zeyang Lei, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, and Wanxiang Che. 2025. Towards few-shot mixed-type dialogue generation. Sci. China Inf. Sci. , 68(2). Libo Qin, Qiguang Chen, Jingxuan Zhou, Jin Wang, Hao Fei, Wanxiang Che, and Min Li. 2025. Divide-solve-combine: An interpretable and accurate prompting framework for zero-shot multi-intent de-tection. In AAAI-25, Sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, Febru-ary 25 - March 4, 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA , pages 25038–25046. AAAI Press. Libo Qin, Tailu Liu, Wanxiang Che, Bingbing Kang, Sendong Zhao, and Ting Liu. 2021. A co-interactive transformer for joint slot filling and intent detection. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Confer-ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 8193–8197. IEEE. Daking Rai, Bailin Wang, Yilun Zhou, and Ziyu Yao. 2023. Improving generalization in language model-based text-to-sql semantic parsing: Two simple se-mantic boundary-based techniques. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , pages 150–160. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tonghui Ren, Yuankai Fan, Zhenying He, Ren Huang, Jiaqi Dai, Can Huang, Yinan Jing, Kai Zhang, Yifan Yang, and X. Sean Wang. 2024. PURPLE: making a large language model a better SQL writer. In 40th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2024, Utrecht, The Netherlands, May 13-16, 2024 , pages 15–28. IEEE. Stephen E. Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and be-yond. Found. Trends Inf. Retr. , 3(4):333–389. Irina Saparina and Mirella Lapata. 2024. AMBROSIA: A benchmark for parsing ambiguous questions into database queries. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Michael Stonebraker, Lawrence A. Rowe, and Michael Hirohama. 2019. The implementation of POST-GRES. In Michael L. Brodie, editor, Making Databases Work: the Pragmatic Wisdom of Michael Stonebraker , volume 22 of ACM Books , pages 519– 559. ACM / Morgan & Claypool. Kimi Team, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, and et al. 2025. Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.20534. Zhensheng Wang, Wenmian Yang, Kun Zhou, Yiquan Zhang, and Weijia Jia. 2025. RETQA: A large-scale open-domain tabular question answering dataset for real estate sector. In AAAI-25, Sponsored by the Asso-ciation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, February 25 - March 4, 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA ,pages 25452–25460. AAAI Press. Bowen Xing, Libo Qin, Zhihong Zhu, Zhou Yu, and Ivor W Tsang. 2025. Dxa-net: Dual-task cross-lingual alignment network for zero-shot cross-lingual spoken language understanding. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, and et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. CoRR , abs/2505.09388. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018 , pages 3911–3921. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark W. Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2017. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning. 

CoRR , abs/1709.00103. 

A Dataset Construction and Statistics 

A.1 Template Filling A.1.1 Implementation Details 

Based on 209 tables, we design 222 seed templates. As shown in Figure 3, these templates are catego-rized by underspecification type: 38 with SELECT underspecification, 113 with FROM underspecifica-tion, and 71 that are specified. Each seed template comprises four components: a Question Template, an SQL Template, a SELECT clarification, and a FROM clarification. The parts enclosed in “{}" are slots to be populated, and the slots across these four components are correspondingly linked. Af-ter randomly selecting appropriate values from the database, these values are used to populate the cor-responding slots within the template. In the tem-plate’s components, the SELECT clarification is stored in a dictionary format without any slots; its purpose is to record the definitive user’s final in-tent after an underspecified query is clarified. The FROM clarification contains slots related to the ta-ble caption, which are populated concurrently with other slots during the data sampling stage. Fur-thermore, the static text (i.e., the non-slot part) of a template determines its intent type and is uni-formly labeled “O" during BIO tagging, whereas the slot parts are tagged according to their specific sampled values. Once all slots in a template are populated, the system executes the query generated from the SQL template, and the query result serves as the final answer to the corresponding question. An example of a complete generated QA pair is illustrated in Figure 5. 

A.1.2 Rationale for Template-based Construction 

Template-based construction with controlled pertur-bations is standard practice in recent QA and TQA datasets, such as MULTITQ (Chen et al., 2023), RETQA (Wang et al., 2025), and SpatialRGPT-Bench (Cheng et al., 2024), etc. This approach en-请问{城市名称}的{项 ⽬名称}这个 ⼩区的环境如何？    

> 区域名称:{区域名称} 列名:容积率
> Question Template:
> SELECT-Clarification
> FROM-Clarification
> SELECT "项 ⽬名称","容积率" FROM "{城市名称}{区域名称} ⼟地成交信息表" WHERE "项 ⽬名称" = '{项 ⽬名称}';
> Column_name: Floor Area Ratio District_name:{District_name}
> Question Template:
> SQL Template:
> SELECT-Clarification
> FROM-Clarification How is the environment of {Project_name} in {City_name}? SELECT "project_name","floor area ratio"
> FROM "Land Auction Table for {District_name}, {City_name}" WHERE "project_name" = '{Project_name}';
> SQL Template:

Figure 3: Examples of Template Filling (Chi-nese–English Bilingual). 

sures that the generated questions are logically con-sistent and answerable. Compared to manual anno-tation or crowdsourcing, which is prohibitively ex-pensive and often suffers from inconsistent quality, template-based generation allows for high-volume, high-quality data creation that covers specific phe-nomena systematically. We acknowledge that pure templates could in principle reduce diversity; there-fore, we deliberately decouple semantic patterns from surface forms. Specifically, templates are used to encode the SQL intent and the specific type of underspecification. The natural-language word-ing is then produced by a LLM that is prompted to use varied, colloquial question styles while strictly preserving the intent and ambiguity constraints. Dictionaries are utilized only to sample realistic en-tities and attribute values from real tables (e.g., city names or financial indicators), not to constrain how questions are phrased. Combined with random sam-pling over templates, entities, and operators, this strategy yields a broad range of question types. The relatively low Text-to-SQL Pass@1 on MAIC-TQA (see Section 5.3) demonstrates that these questions, despite being synthesized, still present significant challenges to current state-of-the-art models. 

A.2 SLU Annotations in TQA 

Figure 4 illustrates the application of Spoken Lan-guage Understanding (SLU) tags, which serve as a critical semantic bridge between unstructured nat-ural language and structured SQL queries in our framework. The SLU annotations consist of two distinct components: Slots and Intents. 1. Slot Tags (BIO Annotation): We employ the BIO (Begin-Inside-Outside) tagging scheme to identify specific entities that act as filtering Utterance: Intent:                         

> have the lowest
> real_estate_project_average_price_query
> OOOOOOOB-M OOO
> average
> OOOB-C
> July
> B-Y OO
> Which of the 5sales communities in Shanghai in 2022 price top ?
> O
> by
> O
> volume
> real_estate_project_sales_volume_query
> Slot:

Figure 4: Illustration of an utterance with SLU tags. The example features two intents, where ‘B-C’ denotes ‘B-City’ and ‘B-Y’ denotes ‘B-Year’. 

constraints in the SQL query. In the visual example, the tokens “Shanghai”, “July”, and “2022” are explicitly tagged as B-C (City), B-M 

(Month), and B-Y (Year), respectively. Among them, “Shanghai” serves as the table scope in-formation (affecting the FROM clause), while “July” and “2022” map directly to the con-dition values in the SQL WHERE clause (e.g., 

WHERE Date = ‘2022-07’ ). 2. Intent Labels: Intents capture the semantic goal of the query, determining which columns and operations (such as sorting or aggregation) are required. The example demonstrates a 

composite intent scenario where the user asks for both volume ranking and price comparison. Consequently, the utterance is labeled with two intents. 

Role in TQA. In the Table Question Answering task, these SLU tags serve as critical intermediate signals for bridging natural language and structured queries. The Intent labels help the model iden-tify the user’s query goal, enabling more effective in-context example retrieval for few-shot learning. The Slot tags, on the other hand, capture the key entities that constitute essential components of the SQL query, such as filtering conditions and target columns. By explicitly decoupling entity extrac-tion (Slots) from logic determination (Intents), the model can better understand user intent and gener-ate SQL queries that are both syntactically correct and semantically aligned with the user’s request. 

A.3 LLM-based Query Rewriting 

Template-generated queries often display rigid and monolithic syntactic patterns, which dif-fer markedly from the more flexible and nat-ural language used by real users. This mis-match can lead to suboptimal model performance when handling authentic user queries. To mit-igate this issue, we leverage Large Language Models (LLMs)—specifically, the Qwen2.5-72B model—to rewrite template-generated queries. This rewriting process is designed to preserve the original semantics while introducing greater lin-guistic diversity through synonym replacement and syntactic structure adjustments, resulting in queries that better resemble human language. Building on this, we also adopt an augmentation strategy in-spired by RETQA, in which questions are further paraphrased using an LLM to enhance linguistic naturalness. Given that our dataset targets under-specified scenarios, we take care to prevent the LLM from simplifying underspecified expressions into non-underspecified forms. To this end, we en-force additional constraints in the prompt, prohibit-ing the use of specific forbidden words—namely, column names defined in the SELECT-Clarification dictionary—to maintain the intended underspecifi-cation. Details of the prompt formulations used for these rewriting processes are provided in Appendix D, Figure 6. 

A.4 Quality Assessment of LLM-based Paraphrasing 

To rigorously validate the quality of the LLM-based rewriting, we conducted a manual assessment on samples drawn exclusively from the test set. We excluded QA pairs without underspecification and randomly selected 200 QA pairs that contained ambiguities for detailed review. The sample dis-tribution included 30 cases of underspecification in the SELECT clause, 137 in the FROM clause, and 159 in the WHERE clause. Note that the sum exceeds 200 due to the presence of mixed-underspecification instances, which were counted across the relevant categories. Human annotators reviewed the 200 sampled QA pairs and confirmed that the rewriting process did not compromise the integrity of the data; specif-ically, no instances were found where the three types of ambiguities were inadvertently deleted or resolved by the LLM. This robust preserva-tion of ambiguity is attributed to our dual-layered validation strategy. First, our prompt design explicitly incorporates specific “forbidden key-words”—corresponding to the missing informa-tion—to constrain the generation process and pre-vent the model from filling in the gaps. Second, we implemented a rigorous string matching check to verify that these prohibited terms do not appear in the final rewritten queries. This combination of constrained prompting and post-generation verifi-cation ensures the accuracy and reliability of the paraphrasing process. 

A.5 Details of Conversational Clarification Interface 

To clarify the mechanism introduced in Section 3.4, we describe the implementation details of our user simulator, which runs in two modes: Fixed and Dynamic. 1. Data Retrieval and Template Construc-tion. When the system correctly detects an un-derspecification (e.g., a missing city in the scope), the interface looks up the ground-truth value from the dataset’s clarification dictionary (e.g., FROM_clarification). It then constructs a standard response sentence, such as “The correct city is [Bei-jing].” 2. Dynamic Response Generation (LLM-based Rewriting). In the dynamic scenario, to simulate the diverse and unpredictable nature of real human language, we employ a LLM (Qwen2.5-72B) to rewrite the standard response. We utilize a spe-cialized prompt (see Figure 7) that instructs the LLM to act as a grammar expert, making the sen-tence more colloquial and using varied sentence structures (e.g., inversions). 3. Reliability Control Mechanism. A critical challenge in automatic generation is ensuring fac-tual consistency. We address this by strict keyword extraction and validation: • Keyword Extraction : Before generation, the system identifies the critical information slot (e.g., "Beijing") that must be present in the response. • Iterative Validation : The generation process includes a max_retries mechanism (set to 5). After the LLM generates a rewrite, the inter-face automatically checks if the extracted key-word exists in the new sentence. • Fallback Strategy : If the generated sentence does not contain the keyword after 5 attempts, the system discards the LLM output and de-faults to the standard template sentence. This mechanism ensures that the “Dynamic” mode tests the target model’s ability to understand natural language variations without introducing false information that could invalidate the QA eval-uation. 

A.6 Rationale for the Simulated Clarification Interface 

While we acknowledge that simulated interactions cannot fully capture the stochastic nature of human behavior, our design choice to utilize a Dynamic Clarification Interface rather than human-in-the-loop evaluation is deliberately driven by the spe-cific requirements of constructing a robust bench-mark. The rationale behind this decision is three-fold: 

Reproducibility and Standardization for Bench-marking. The primary objective of ODUTQA is to provide a standardized testbed for evaluat-ing SQL generation capabilities under uncertainty. Human-based evaluation, while offering high real-ism, inherently suffers from high variance, subjec-tivity, and irreproducibility. A strictly “real” envi-ronment would make it mathematically impossible to fairly compare different models or track progress over time, as the “test set” (the variable human re-sponses) would shift with every interaction. Our simulated approach guarantees that every model is evaluated against a consistent, reliable, and rigor-ous standard, which is paramount for a scientific benchmark. 

The Hybrid Design: Controlled Logic with Gen-erative Flexibility. We clarify that our interface is not “rule-based” in the traditional sense of rigid templates. We employ a hybrid architecture to balance logical correctness with linguistic natural-ness: • Decision Layer (Deterministic): The deci-sion of what to clarify is governed by logic de-rived from the dataset’s Gold Labels. This is necessary to ensure the provided information accurately resolves the specific ambiguity in the SQL generation task without introducing hallucinatory noise or irrelevant deviations. • Generation Layer (Probabilistic): The ac-tual dialogue utterances are generated by a state-of-the-art LLM (Qwen2.5-72B) condi-tioned on the dialogue history. As shown in our manual inspection, this allows for diverse wording, varying sentence structures, and nat-ural phrasing. The model is free to formulate the question as long as it conveys the neces-sary disambiguating information. This design allows us to “stress test” models with linguistically diverse inputs while maintaining the logical precision required for automated evaluation. 

Scalability and Cost-Effectiveness. For a bench-mark to be practically useful to the research com-munity, it must be scalable. Our automated in-terface allows for the evaluation of thousands of samples and multiple model iterations at a negligi-ble cost compared to human annotation. This ac-cessibility encourages broader adoption and more frequent testing, which is critical for advancing the field of text-to-SQL. In summary, while we trade off a degree of be-havioral realism, we gain the reliability, validity, and operability essential for a scientific benchmark. We believe this is the optimal approach for quan-titatively assessing underspecification resolution capabilities. 

A.7 Dataset Statistics 

Table 4 presents the detailed statistics of the ODTQA-FoRe dataset concerning question under-specification, intent type, and table type. The dataset comprises 5,095 non-underspecified ques-tions (20.29%). It also features questions with un-derspecifications related to specific SQL clauses: 197 for SELECT (7.85%), 3,274 for FROM (13.04%), and 4,421 for WHERE (17.61%). No-tably, the dataset contains 12,118 questions with mixed underspecifications (48.27%), underscoring the complexity of the challenge. Regarding intent, it includes 1,966 single-intent and 23,139 multi-intent questions. Based on table sources, there are 3,851 single-table and 21,254 multi-table questions, increasing the reasoning complexity. The dataset features 6 distinct slot types and is built upon 102 Property Information Tables, 4 Real Estate Com-pany Finance Information Tables, and 103 Land Auction Information Tables. To facilitate model development and evaluation, the dataset is parti-tioned into a training set (14,973), a validation set (5,046), and a test set (5,086). These statistics un-derscore the comprehensive and representative na-ture of ODUTQA-MDC, especially in terms of the complexity of underspecification and the diversity of annotation labels. 

B Supplementary experiments 

B.1 SLU Task 

Table 5 presents the performance comparison of In-tent and Slot prediction in queries using BERT and ICL methods. For the BERT model, we fine-tune the “Bert-base-chinese 1” version on the training set, following the procedure outlined in the main text. The training hyperparameters for BERT are a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5 and a batch size of 16. In the ICL scenario, we select a sufficient number of samples from the training set, covering all intent types, to construct the context. These samples in-cluded both intent and slot information, enabling LLMs to generate intent and slot labels for new queries in a single pass. When the SLU label for-mat in the LLM output is not standardized, we select the label that most closely matches the out-put characters. The experimental results indicate that the fine-tuned BERT model achieves better per-formance in predicting SLU labels compared with ICL methods. However, fine-tuning requires exten-sive manual annotation, whereas the ICL methods can achieve comparable results with only a few examples. 

B.2 Implementation of baseline 

Furthermore, to highlight the challenges our dataset presents to existing methods, we adopt SLUTQA as a baseline approach. SLUTQA follows the design described in its original paper, selecting prompt templates based on the detected user intent and in-corporating SLU information into the prompt to guide the LLM in generating more accurate SQL. Notably, SLUTQA does not invoke the clarifica-tion interface, as it lacks a built-in mechanism for underspecification detection. 

B.3 Ablation Study 

To evaluate the contribution of each module within the MAIC-TQA framework in handling underspeci-fied queries, we conduct a series of ablation studies on the Qwen3 32B and Qwen3 30B A3B models. These experiments involve removing the clarifi-cation mechanisms for intent underspecification (SELECT), scope underspecification (FROM), and condition underspecification (WHERE). The re-sults are presented in Table 6. The results indicate that removing the intent clar-ification mechanism has the least impact on perfor-mance. Specifically, for Qwen3 32B, ECR and 

> 1https://huggingface.co/google-bert/bert-base-chinese

Statistics Num Non-underspecified 5,095 SELECT underspecification 197 FROM underspecification 3,274 WHERE underspecification 4,421 Mixed-underspecification 12,118 Single intent 1,966 Multi intents 23,139 Single Table 3,851 Multi Tables 21,254 Slot type 6Poperty Information Tables 102 Real Estate Enterprise Finance Information Tables 4Land Auction Information Tables 103 Train 14,973 Validation 5,046 Test 5,086 

> Table 4: Dataset Statistics.

Pass@1 decrease by 6.13% and 4.45%, respec-tively. For Qwen3 30B A3B, ECR and Pass@1 decrease by 3.69% and 4.81%, respectively. In con-trast, removing the scope clarification mechanism most severely affects the ECR metric, leading to a significant drop of 16.92% for Qwen3 32B and 15.31% for Qwen3 30B A3B. Meanwhile, remov-ing the condition clarification mechanism has the most pronounced impact on the Pass@1 metric, causing it to fall by 28.59% and 27.29% for the two models. These findings highlight that scope and condition underspecifications are the primary factors limiting performance on this dataset and confirm the effectiveness of our proposed clarifica-tion mechanisms in addressing these issues. 

B.4 Impact of Dynamic Clarification. 

As shown in Tables 2, different models exhibit vary-ing performance fluctuations between fixed and dynamic clarification modes. It is important to clar-ify that this variance is not due to interface design flaws or the provision of incorrect ("bad") clarifi-cation information. Instead, our interface employs a strict built-in verification mechanism to ensure reliability: it retrieves canonical fact information from the ground-truth dictionaries only when the system’s detection label is correct. In dynamic mode, while the LLM rewrites this canonical infor-mation into conversational paraphrases (e.g., using colloquialisms or inverted structures), the design strictly enforces the inclusion of key entity words. Model Task P R F1 BERT Intent 98.51 98.61 98.56 Slots 99.68 99.88 99.78 Qwen3 30B Intent 90.57 91.73 91.00 Slots 97.01 96.79 96.90 Qwen3 32B Intent 88.27 91.27 89.74 Slots 96.07 97.23 96.64  

> Table 5: Performance of Different Models on SLU Tasks.

This ensures that the generated content remains se-mantically fact-accurate. Therefore, the observed performance differences are primarily attributed to the varying robustness of different backbone mod-els against diverse linguistic surface forms, as well as the inherent stochasticity in generation, rather than factual noise introduced by the clarification interface. Notably, our main conclusions remain stable across both modes, as MAIC-TQA consis-tently demonstrates significant superiority. 

C Computing Infrastructure Statement 

All neural network models are implemented using PyTorch 2 v2.3.1. For training the BERT model, we use a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. For experiments of LLMs, we perform inference with the SGLang library 3 on eight NVIDIA A800-SXM4-80GB GPUs. Specifically, we allocate four 

> 2https://pytorch.org/
> 3https://docs.sglang.ai/

Method Model ECR Pass@1 Qwen3 32B 97.46 57.44 MAIC-TQA Qwen3 30B 96.32 54.11 Qwen3 32B 91.33 52.99 w/o SELECT Qwen3 30B 92.63 49.30 Qwen3 32B 80.54 35.98 w/o FROM Qwen3 30B 81.01 31.84 Qwen3 32B 90.72 28.85 w/o WHERE Qwen3 30B 90.34 26.82 

Table 6: Ablation study of the clarification modules in the MAIC-TQA framework. 

GPUs to the Qwen3 32B model, four to the Qwen3 30B A3B model. Model responses for Kimi K2 (0711-preview version), GLM 4 plus, and Doubao Seed 1.6 (flash version) are obtained through their respective official APIs 4 5 6 to ensure consistency and reliability of the inference process. 

D Prompts and Functions of Agent 

This section summarizes the prompts used for data construction and within the MAIC-TQA frame-work. The rewriting prompt for data construction is presented in Figure 6. Within the MAIC-TQA framework, the Scope Validator Agent uses the prompt shown in Figure 8 to verify the scope information in user queries, uti-lizing the Slot Retrieval Tool defined by Algorithm 1. The Table Retrieval Agent then uses the prompt shown in Figure 9 to summarize the target table. Finally, the SQL Generation and Validation Agent utilizes the prompt in Figure 10 to generate and validate SQL queries, and utilizes the tool defined by Algorithm 2 to execute SQL statements.     

> 4Kimi K2: https://api.moonshot.cn/v1
> 5GLM 4 plus: https://open.bigmodel.cn/api/paas/ v4 6Doubao Seed 1.6: https://ark.cn-beijing.volces. com/api/v3

Dataset Example 

Query : ⼴州市的滨江雅苑的 ⼩区环境怎么样？ 

Intent : "未知" 

Slots: ["B-city",  "I-city",  "I-city",  "O",  "B-community", "I-community", "I-community", "I-community",  "O", 

"O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "O"] 

SELECT-Clarification: {" 列名 ": " 绿化率 "} 

FROM-Clarification: {" 从化区 ": " 区域 "} 

WHERE-Clarification:  {" 雅居乐滨江雅苑 ": " 项⽬

名称 "} 

Intent-Underspecification: "True" 

Scope-Underspecification:  [" 从化区 ", " 区域 ", "Missing"] 

Condition-Underspecification:  [" 滨江雅苑 ", " 项⽬名称", " 不存在 "] 

Table_caption : [" ⼴州市从化区 ⼟地成交信息表 "] 

SQL : SELECT " 项⽬名称 "," 绿化率(%) " FROM " ⼴州市从化区 ⼟地成交信息表 " WHERE " 项⽬名称 " = '雅居乐滨江雅苑 '; 

Answer:  绿化率是25% 。

Query : How is the environment of Binjiang Garden in Guangzhou City? 

Intent : "unknown" 

Slots:  ["O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "O",  "B-community", "I-community",  "O", "B-city",  "I-city",  "O"] 

SELECT-Clarification:  {"Column Name": "Green Coverage Ratio"} 

FROM-Clarification:  {"Conghua District": "District"} 

WHERE-Clarification:  {"Agile Binjiang Garden": "Project Name"} 

Intent-Underspecification:  "True" 

Scope-Underspecification:  ["Conghua District", "District", "Missing"] 

Condition-Underspecification:  ["Binjiang Garden", "Project Name", "not  exist"] 

Table_caption : ["Table of Land Auction Information in Conghua District, Guangzhou"] 

SQL : SELECT "Project Name","Green Coverage Ratio" FROM "Table of Land Auction Information in Conghua District, Guangzhou" WHERE "Project Name" = 'Agile Binjiang Garden'; 

Answer:  The Green Coverage Ratio is 25%. 

Figure 5: QA example. Rewriting Prompt 

Your input is a query obtained by filling in city and district names based on a template. Please process your input <Query> as follows; do not answer the question directly. The main goal is to rewrite the <Query>  while ensuring the meaning remains unchanged and the <Keywords> are preserved: 1.  <Keywords>  listed must not be altered and must appear in the <Rewritten_query>.  <Keywords>  are the city name, district name, year, month, or time range. 2. <Forbidden_keywords> listed must not appear in the rewritten query. You can only use approximate phrasing. The intent of the  <Rewritten_query>  is to phrase a vague question regarding the  <Forbidden_keywords>. 3.  You only need to rewrite the question, not answer it. Rewriting methods include, but are not limited to, inversion and synonym replacement. 4. "<Forbidden_keywords>: 'None'" indicates there are no forbidden words. 5. You can be creative and increase sentence diversity while ensuring the meaning remains unchanged, <Keywords> are preserved, and <Forbidden_keywords>  do not appear. ############Example 1############## <Query>:Which environment is better when comparing Yuyue Guangnian and Nanan Chaoming in Yuhuatai District, Nanjing City? <Keywords>:['Yuyue Guangnian', 'Nanan Chaoming',  'Yuhuatai District', 'Nanjing',  ]<Forbidden_keywords>:Greening Rate (%) <Rewritten Query>:When analyzing from the perspective of neighborhood environment, which is better between Yuyue Guangnian and Nanan Chaoming in Nanjing's Yuhuatai District? ############Example 2############## 

. . . . . . 

#########Complete the following######### <Query>:{query} <Keywords>:{keywords} <Forbidden_keywords>:{forbidden_keywords} <Rewritten Query>: Figure 6: Query rewriting prompts for dataset construction. Rewriting Prompt for Dynamic Clarification Interface 

You are a grammar rewriting expert. Please rewrite the input sentence to make it sound more natural and human-like. Do not change the original meaning of the sentence, and do not output any explanations or notes. You may use various grammatical structures like inversion, add modal particles, and make it as colloquial as possible. Note: The keyword '{keyword}' must be included. Now, please rewrite the following sentence: {sentence} 

> Figure 7: Prompt for sentence rewriting used in the dynamic clarification interface.

Algorithm 1 The slotSearchTool used by the SV agent 

Require: slots : str or List[str]; domain : str 

Ensure: result : Dict[str, int] 

Parameter: all _domains : List[str]  

> 1:

if domain / ∈ all _domains then  

> 2:

Raise error: “Unknown domain"  

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

if slots is a string then  

> 5:

Convert slots to a list with one element  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

captions ← all_table_captions[domain]  

> 8:

Initialize result ← empty dictionary  

> 9:

for each slot in slots do  

> 10:

count ← 0 

> 11:

for each caption in captions do  

> 12:

if slot is a substring of caption then  

> 13:

count ← count + 1  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

result [slot ] ← count  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

return result 

Algorithm 2 The sqlQueryTool used by the SGV agent 

Require: sql _statement : str; db _name : str 

Ensure: result : str 

Parameter: all _db _names : List[str]  

> 1:

Define try _execute _on _db (database ): 

> 2:

Create PostgresQueryExecutor instance with given database  

> 3:

Return result of executing sql _statement  

> 4:

if db _name ∈ all _db _names then  

> 5:

result ← try _execute _on _db (db _name ) 

> 6: 7:

return str( result ) 

> 8:

else if db _name == ‘unknowDomain’ then  

> 9:

for each db _name in all _db _names do  

> 10:

result ← try _execute _on _db (db _name ) 

> 11:

if result is of type list then  

> 12: 13:

return str( result ) 

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16: 17:

return “Failed to execute SQL on all databases."  

> 18:

else  

> 19: 20:

return “Invalid database name: " + db _name  

> 21:

end if Prompt for Scope Validator Agent 

You are a slot classification agent. Based on the provided input, you are required to use a tool to perform slot verification and classify the slots accordingly. 

Note: In the final output, only the classification results should be included. Do not include any thought processes or other additional content. ### Input Description ###: <Query>: A string representing the original sentence from which the slots are extracted. <Domain>: A string indicating the question domain; one of 'realEstateSalesField', 'landInformationField', or 'enterpriseFinanceField'. <Slots>: A list in the format "type:slot", representing the extracted slots and their corresponding types from the <Query>. <Target Slot Types>: A list of slot types that are required to appear in the current question. ### Tool Description ###: You must use a retrieval tool named "slotSearchTool", which is designed to verify whether a slot or a combination of slots exists within table headers under the specified <Domain>. "slotSearchTool" Input: 'slots': A 'str' or 'List[str]' representing the slot(s) or slot combination(s) to be searched. 'domain': A 'str' representing the question domain. Return: A Dict[str, int], where each key is a slot string and the value indicates the number of tables found (0 means not found, 1 means found in 1 table, n means found in n tables). ### Processing Procedure ###: ========================Step 1: Slot Verification ======================== 1. Extract Target Slots: Filter all slots in <Slots> that match the <Target Slot Types>. 2. Invoke Tool for Verification: 

- Single-slot Verification: Search each target slot individually and record the results. 

- Combined-slot Verification: Combine target slots (e.g., city + district) according to their order of appearance in <Query>, then perform combined verification. ============Step 2: Slot Classification (Apply rules in priority order) ============= 1. 'Missing': 

- If a target slot type does not appear at all in <Slots>, classify it as ['', slot_type, 'Missing']. 2. 'Unmatch' (Combination Mismatch): 

- All individual slot checks return values > 0 (i.e., all exist individually); 

- But the combination slot query returns 0; 

- Then both slots in the combination are classified as [slot, slot_type, 'Unmatch']. 

- Important: Once classified as 'Unmatch', these slots cannot be reclassified as 'Error' or 'Correct'. 3. 'Error' (Retrieval Failed): 

- If a slot is present in '<Slots>' but its single-slot verification result is 0, classify it as [slot, slot_type, 'Error']. 4. 'Correct' (Fully Matched): 

- All target slot types are present; 

- All individual slot queries return values > 0; 

- Combined slot query also returns > 0; 

- Then each involved slot is classified as [slot, slot_type, 'Correct']. ############ [Example] ########## <Query>: "Please provide the building density of Dongping Town in Shanghai and Yuntai Yuanzhu in Jianye District, Nanjing." <Domain>: 'realEstateSalesField' <Slots>: ['city:Shanghai', 'community:Dongping Town', 'city:Nanjing', 'district:Jianye District', 'community:Yuntai Yuanzhu'] <Target Slot Types>: ['city', 'district'] → Input to "slotSearchTool": (['Shanghai', 'Nanjing', 'Jianye District', 'Jianye District, Nanjing'], 'realEstateSalesField') → Return: {'Shanghai': 18, 'Nanjing': 11, 'Jianye District': 0, 'Jianye District, Nanjing': 0} → Classification Result: [['Shanghai', 'city', 'Correct'], 

['', 'district', 'Missing'], 

['Nanjing', 'city', 'Correct'], 

['Jianye District', 'district', 'Error']] Figure 8: Prompt for slots classification. Summary Prompt for Table Retrieval Agent 

You are an information extraction assistant. Based on the <Dialog> conversation below, extract the table names relevant to the user's query. ### Task Instructions 1. In the <Dialog>, "system" represents the system's follow-up questions based on the user's original input, and "user" represents the user's supplementary information in response to errors or omissions; 2. The user’s original query may contain mistakes — you should make judgments based on the user’s supplemental input; 3. The <Summary> should be a list consisting of a geographic region + table name, such as "Table of Property Transaction Prices in Haidian District, Beijing"; ############ Example 1 ############## <Dialog>: User: Could you tell me how many property units were sold in November 2020 in Park No.1 in Daxing District, Beijing, and Jing'an No.1 in Shanghai? System: Your input lacks a region name. Please provide the correct region. User: The correct region should be Jing'an District. <Summary>: ["Table of Property Transaction Prices in Jing'an District, Shanghai", "Table of Property Transaction Prices in Daxing District, Beijing"] ############ Example 2 ############## <Dialog>: User: Please check the average transaction prices in June 2020 for Jinyue Mansion in Miyun District, Beijing and Hyde Apartment in Yuhang District, Hangzhou. <Summary>: ["Table of Property Transaction Prices in Miyun District, Beijing", "Table of Property Transaction Prices in Yuhang District, Hangzhou"] 

······ 

########## Complete the following#  ######### <Dialog>: {query} <Summary>: Figure 9: Prompt for table caption summarization. Prompt for SQL Generation and Validation Agent 

You are an assistant for SQL generation and validation. ### Input Components <Dialog>: A conversation containing system follow-up prompts and user-provided corrections. 

- system: Follow-up questions posed by the system after detecting errors in the user’s original query. 

- user: Corrected information provided by the user in response to the system's prompt. <Domain>: The domain of the query, which also serves as an input to the `sqlQueryTool`. <SLOTS>: Key database information extracted from the user’s original question. <Table_Captions>: Predicted table titles relevant to the database. ### Task Workflow ============================= Step 1: SQL Generation ============================= 1. Analyze the content of the <Dialog> to identify the user's query intent. 2. Important: Always prioritize the corrected information provided by the user over the erroneous information in the original query. 3. Generate an SQL query using the provided <SLOTS> and <Table_Captions>. 4. Strictly follow the format shown in the examples below. ############ Example 1 ############## <Dialog>: User: What is the operating profit of Lishui Economic Development Group? System: Your input is missing the year. Please provide a year between 2019 and 2022. User: I'm interested in the year 2021. <Domain>: enterpriseFinanceField 

<SLOTS>: {'Lishui Economic Development Group': 'Enterprise Name'} 

<Table_Captions>: National Enterprise Finance Table 2021 

<SQL>: SELECT "Enterprise Name", "Operating Profit" FROM "National Enterprise Finance Table 2021" WHERE "Enterprise Name" = 'Nanjing Lishui Economic and Technological Development Group Co., Ltd.'; ############ Example 2 ############## <Dialog>: User: What were the profits of Tahoe Group Co., Ltd. and Sunshine New Industry Real Estate Co., Ltd. in 2019? <Domain>: enterpriseFinanceField 

<SLOTS>: {'2019': 'Year', 'Tahoe Group Co., Ltd.': 'Enterprise Name', 'Sunshine New Industry Real Estate Co., Ltd.': 'Enterprise Name'} 

<Table_Captions>: National Enterprise Finance Table 2019 

<SQL>: SELECT "Enterprise Name", "Operating Profit" FROM "National Enterprise Finance Table 2019" WHERE "Enterprise Name" IN ('Tahoe Group Co., Ltd.', 'Sunshine New Industry Real Estate Co., Ltd.'); 

······ 

===========================  Step 2: SQL Validation and Execution ====================== Use the "sqlQueryTool" (input: SQL query and domain) to validate the generated SQL. Note: You are allowed to call the tool only once for validation. "sqlQueryTool" input: - sql_statement: str, the SQL query to execute 

- domain: str, the domain of the query 

Returns: - The result of the SQL execution ================================  Step 3: Final Output ============================= After executing the SQL using the tool, construct the final output in the following dictionary format: ```json {

"sql": "<The actual SQL statement executed, ending with a semicolon — do not omit it>", 

"result": "<The result of the SQL execution, or the error message if execution failed>", 

"note": [] or [['slot content', 'slot type', 'not  exist']  , ...] }``` Figure 10: Prompt for SQL generation and condition underspecification detection.