Title: SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04608v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 00:37:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition 

## Naiyu Zheng 

naiyzheng2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk City University of Hong Kong Hong Kong 

## Tianlong Yu 

tommyyu21@163.com Hubei University China 

## Haochen Yin 

1155178600@link.cuhk.edu.hk The Chinese University of Hong Kong Hong Kong 

## Xiaoyi Fan 

xiaoyi.fan@ieee.org Shenzhen MSU-BIT University China 

## Xiping Hu 

huxp@bit.edu.cn Shenzhen MSU-BIT University China 

## Zhimeng Yin 

zhimeyin@cityu.edu.hk City University of Hong Kong Hong Kong 

## Abstract 

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) using Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors is a cornerstone of mobile health, smart en-vironments, and human-computer interaction. However, current deep learning-based HAR models often struggle with heavy re-liance on labeled data, position-specific ambiguity, and a lack of transparent reasoning. Inspired by the advanced agents framework, which emulates a collaborative agent using Large Language Models (LLMs), we propose SensingAgents, a novel multi-agent system for robust IMU activity recognition. SensingAgents organizes LLM-powered agents into specialized roles: an group of Analyst Agents for position-specific sensor analysis (arm, wrist, belt, pocket), a pair of Advocate Agents that resolves sensor conflicts through dy-namic and static dialectical debates, and a Decision Agent that ensures reliability under sensor drift or failure. Evaluation on the Shoaib dataset demonstrates that SensingAgents significantly out-performs state-of-the-art single-agent and multi-agent LLM models, achieving an accuracy of 79.5% in a zero setting—29% higher than existing agent models and 9.4% higher than deep learning base-lines—particularly in complex scenarios where multi-sensor data is conflicting or noisy. Our work highlights the potential of multi-agent collaborative reasoning for advancing the robustness and interpretability of ubiquitous sensing systems. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile com-puting systems and tools .

## Keywords 

Human Activity Recognition, Multi-Agent Systems, Large Language Models, Sensor Fusion, IMU Sensing 

ACM Reference Format: 

Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhi-meng Yin. 2026. SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

> Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
> 2026. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

## 1 Introduction 

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) has emerged as a pivotal re-search area within the broader domain of ubiquitous computing and the Internet of Things (IoT). Its applications span a diverse range, from enhancing personalized healthcare and elder care systems to optimizing fitness tracking, facilitating smart home automation, and enabling immersive augmented reality experiences [ 6, 28 , 31 ]. The pervasive deployment of wearable devices, including smart-phones, smartwatches, and dedicated Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) tags, has led to an unprecedented deluge of inertial data. This data encompasses acceleration, angular velocity, and magnetic field strength, providing a rich, continuous stream of information about human physiological and behavioral states. In essence, it serves as the digital heartbeat of modern health analytics, offering invalu-able insights into the daily routines and well - being of millions of individuals [13]. Wrist IMUs 

Arm IMUs 

Belt IMUs 

Pocket IMUs 

Figure 1: The IMU data is normally collected at several body positions to capture a comprehensive representation of hu-man activity, each with distinct motion dynamics. 

However, despite the abundance of IMU data, robust HAR re-mains challenging along three fundamental dimensions: inter-pretability , multi-position adaptability , and dependence on labeled data . First, most high-performing HAR systems rely on deep learning architectures such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and more recently Transformers, which are effective at modeling spatial and tempo-ral patterns in sensor streams [ 10 , 19 ]. Yet these models typically behave as “black boxes,” offering little insight into why a specific prediction was made. This lack of interpretability is particularly problematic in high-stakes applications such as remote patient monitoring and fall detection, where users and practitioners must  

> arXiv:2605.04608v1 [cs.AI] 6 May 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhimeng Yin

understand the rationale behind a classification in order to trust, debug, and refine the system. Second, HAR systems must operate under substantial variability across body positions. In real deployments, sensors placed on the arm, wrist, belt, or pocket capture the same activity through differ-ent motion signatures, and those signatures may even conflict. For example, during walking, a pocket-mounted sensor may strongly re-flect locomotion, while a wrist-mounted sensor may appear nearly static if arm swing is limited. Traditional sensor fusion methods, including early fusion and late fusion [ 7 , 21 ], often merge these signals without explicitly reasoning about why they disagree. As a result, they struggle with multi-position adaptability , especially when placements are heterogeneous, noisy, or partially unreliable. Third, most supervised HAR pipelines require substantial labeled datasets to achieve strong performance. Collecting such annota-tions across users, activities, device placements, and environmental conditions is costly and difficult to scale. This heavy labeled data requirement limits deployment in realistic settings, where new sensor configurations or user populations may not have sufficient annotated examples. Although recent LLM-based sensing methods have opened the door to zero-shot and few-shot activity recognition [ 12 , 16 , 23 , 26 ], existing approaches usually adopt a single-agent design that processes all sensor streams jointly. This can lead to hal-lucinated reasoning, weak grounding in raw signal characteristics, and poor handling of conflicts across positions. More recent multi-agent frameworks [ 14 , 27 , 29 ], improve collaborative reasoning but still leave two important limitations insufficiently addressed: high token consumption and weak conflict resolution . Because mul-tiple agents repeatedly exchange long natural-language summaries over the full sensor context, inference cost grows quickly, mak-ing such frameworks difficult to deploy at scale. At the same time, when heterogeneous body-position sensors provide contradictory evidence, these methods typically rely on semantic discussion or shallow consensus mechanisms rather than an explicit debate struc-ture grounded in signal-level analysis. As a result, they may still struggle to determine whether disagreement reflects true activity dynamics, sensor noise, or position-specific ambiguity. To address these three challenges, we propose SensingAgents , a modular multi-agent framework for robust IMU activity recognition. For interpretability , SensingAgents decomposes inference into explicit analyst, debate, and decision stages, enabling the system to produce transparent intermediate rationales rather than a single opaque prediction. For multi-position adaptability , the frame-work assigns position-specific Analyst Agents to independently interpret local sensor streams from the arm, wrist, belt, and pocket, then uses Dynamic and Static Advocate Agents to debate and recon-cile conflicting evidence across placements. For reducing reliance on labeled data , SensingAgents leverages the zero-shot reasoning ability of LLMs while grounding each agent with tailored tools such as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), peak analysis, and spectral density estimation, so that predictions remain tied to measurable signal properties instead of large amounts of task-specific supervision. This design also addresses the limitations highlighted above: by assigning each agent a focused role, SensingAgents avoids unneces-sary full-context exchanges that inflate token consumption, and by introducing an explicit Dynamic–Static debate followed by a Deci-sion Agent, it resolves cross-position conflicts more systematically than shallow semantic consensus. Together, these components form a “society of agents” that combines structured reasoning, token-efficient collaboration, and signal-level grounding to deliver more trustworthy and robust HAR. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: 

• We propose SensingAgents, the first position-specific multi-agent LLM framework for HAR that enhances both the ac-curacy and the transparency of activity recognition. 

• We introduce a modular tool-calling layer that bridges LLM reasoning with deterministic signal analysis on raw data, ensuring physical interpretability and token efficiency. 

• We design a movement-specific debate mechanism that re-solves conflicts between heterogeneous body positions using a ”Dynamic-Static” reasoning logic. 

• We validate the framework on the Shoaib dataset, demon-strating state-of-the-art performance in zero-shot adaptation and robustness against signal corruption. 

## 2 Motivation 

The motivation for SensingAgents is rooted in the empirical per-formance gaps observed when applying conventional HAR models to multi-position sensing scenarios. 

## 2.1 Positional Sensitivity and Domain Shift 

The variability of IMU signals across different body parts is a fun-damental challenge in HAR. Sensors positioned at the user’s center of gravity (e.g., the belt) provide stable, torso-centric data that is highly informative for identifying user-independent locomotion patterns. Conversely, sensors on the extremities, such as the wrist or arm, are susceptible to additional noise from non-ambulatory gestures like drinking, typing, or expressive hand movements. 

Table 1: Positional Signal Characteristics               

> Position Dominant Motion Reliability (Walk) Reliability (Sit)
> Arm Rotational/Swing High Low (Arm-shift noise) Belt Vertical/Oscillatory Very High Very High (Gravity) Pocket Linear/Impact High Medium (Clothing) Wrist Multi-axial Medium Low (Gesticulation)

Table 1 compares the typical signal characteristics and classi-fication reliability for common activities across these positions, illustrating why a one-size-fits-all model struggles to generalize. The data implies that while the belt is optimal for core activity detection, the wrist and arm provide complementary information for detecting upper-body engagement. Monolithic models often fail to capture these nuances because they either aggregate all features into a flat vector or rely on fixed input shapes that cannot adapt if a sensor is removed or added. This motivates a modular architecture where each position is treated as a specialized analytical domain. 

## 2.2 Preprocessing and Cognitive Load Mitigation for LLM-based Sensing 

Directly applying LLMs to raw sensor data necessitates careful con-sideration of token limits and input dimensionality. High-frequency sensors, such as an IMU sampled at 100 Hz, produce thousands of SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 2: Comparison of representative models for HAR                                    

> Method Category Accuracy Interpretability Multi-position Adaptability Labelled Data Requirements
> SVM, Random Forest ML-based High Low Low Medium DeepConvLSTM DL-based High Low Low High LIMU-BERT Self-supervised High Low Low High SensorLLM Single-Agent Medium Medium Low Low MultiAgentsCR Multi-Agent Medium Medium High Low
> SensingAgents (Ours) Multi-Agent High High High Zero

data points within a short window, which can easily overwhelm the context window of LLMs. Furthermore, when relying on a single LLM agent to process all concurrent sensor streams, the model fre-quently experiences ”cognitive overload.” Confronted with a deluge of numerical observations and textual descriptions from multiple body positions, a single-agent LLM may struggle to synthesize con-tradictory evidence and is therefore prone to hallucinations [ 2], producing plausible but incorrect activity classifications by over-indexing on noisy signals or neglecting conflicting information. Prompt: You are an IMU -based activity detector …   

> Here are the sensor readings:
> ARM : [0.23, 0.45, 0.12, 0.56, 0.34, 0.45, 0.23...]
> BELT : [0.11, 0.22, 0.44, 0.55, 0.33, 0.66, 0.11...]
> POCKET : [0.31, 0.12, 0.24, 0.67, 0.78, 0.33, 0.21...]
> WRIST : [0.42, 0.31, 0.15, 0.28, 0.67, 0.23, 0.34…]
> …
> Please infer the most likely human activity.
> Single LLM

Token 

Explosion 

Signal 

Conflicts 

Low 

Accuracy 

Figure 2: A traditional single agent leads to cognitive overload and hallucinations. 

To mitigate input complexity, existing approaches typically em-ploy downsampling and quantization strategies. For instance, a 360 Hz signal can be downsampled to 36 Hz and quantized to integer values, reducing sequence length while preserving essential mor-phological features for activity recognition. However, even with such token optimization, relying solely on an LLM’s internal tex-tual reasoning to interpret complex signal morphology remains suboptimal. These limitations motivate the development of struc-tured agentic architectures that distribute reasoning across multiple agents, resolve conflicts among heterogeneous sensor observations, and invoke external signal processing tools to verify and refine sensing logic. 

## 2.3 Transparent Interpretability 

A major barrier to the adoption of AI in monitoring and analysis is the ’black-box’ nature of deep neural networks. In a geriatric care scenario, a system must not only detect a fall but also provide the reasoning behind the alert to minimize false alarms and build trust with medical staff. Existing literature emphasizes the need for Explainable AI [ 1 , 11 ] that can articulate human-intuitive rationale. However, simple post-hoc explanations generated by deep learn-ing models often lack causal transparency. To address this limitation, LLMs can serve as as the reasoning core within a multi-agent frame-work to achieve Transparent Interpretability . The system is expected to generate a clear Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [ 22 ] that explicitly doc-uments how positional data are analyzed, how conflicting evidence is debated, and how the final consensus is reached. This transpar-ent reasoning process allows users to trace the system’s decision logic, verifying whether a “walking” classification arises from a legitimate gait pattern or from anomalous arm movements. Such transparency is essential for ensuring safety, accountability, and user trust in ubiquitous sensing applications. 

## 3 Related Work 

The field of HAR has evolved through several distinct phases, from traditional machine learning and deep learning to the recent emer-gence of LLMs and multi-agent systems, as shown in Table 2. 

## 3.1 Traditional and Deep Learning for HAR 

Early Human Activity Recognition (HAR) systems used a two-stage pipeline: extracting hand-crafted features from IMU time-series (e.g., mean, variance, FFT-based frequency features) [ 30 ], then clas-sifying them with SVMs, Random Forests, or HMMs [ 17 ]. While effective in controlled settings, these methods relied on domain expertise and often failed to generalize across users or environ-ments. To overcome these generalization challenges, deep learning has been increasingly adopted in HAR, enabling automatic fea-ture extraction from raw sensor data. For instance, CNNs capture spatial patterns in multi-channel IMU signals, and RNNs model tem-poral dependencies [ 19 ]. These models outperformed traditional approaches on benchmarks like the Shoaib dataset [ 20 ]. More re-cently, Transformer-based architectures leverage self-attention to capture long-range temporal and cross-sensor dependencies [ 10 ], while self-supervised frameworks such as LIMU-BERT [ 24 ] shows promise by pre-training on large unlabeled IMU data. Despite progress, deep models remain largely "black box" sys-tems, which limits interpretability which is critical in safety-sensitive domains like healthcare. They also struggle with sensor noise, drift, and inter-user variability, requiring heavily labeled data and trans-fer learning. Monolithic architectures still lack explicit mechanisms to handle conflicting signals from multiple body-worn sensors. 

## 3.2 LLMs in Ubiquitous Sensing 

Inspired by LLM success in NLP, researchers have applied them to non-linguistic data like IMU streams [ 3, 5, 8]. LLMs’ ability to pro-cess and reason with text makes them well suited for interpreting sensor data and generating human-readable explanations. Projects such as SensorLLM [ 16 ], HAR-GPT [ 12 ], and ZARA [ 15 ] pioneered Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhimeng Yin Belt Analyst Agent    

> Belt Prompt
> Result: Upstairs
> Pocket Analyst Agent
> Pocket Prompt
> Result: Walking
> Wrist Analyst Agent
> Wrist Prompt
> Result: Standing
> Raw
> Readings Domain -Expert Tools
> Tool Calling
> Dynamic State
> Advocate Agent Static State
> Advocate Agent Debate
> Mechansim
> N Rounds N Rounds

Advocate Agents: Conflict Resolution  

> Decision Agent
> Final Result :
> Walking ✅
> Chain of Thoughts
> Explanation
> Periodicity Analysis
> Intensity Analysis
> Frequency Analysis

Figure 3: Workflow of SensingAgents. 

this direction. These works show that LLMs can perform zero-shot or few-shot activity recognition by aligning pre-processed sensor data (e.g., symbolic representations or summaries) with natural language descriptions of activities. For example, an LLM prompted with a wrist accelerometer summary like "high frequency, moderate amplitude oscillations" can infer the activity. Recent efforts also explore LLMs for late multimodal fusion [ 7] and semantic align-ment [ 25 ]. However, most current approaches use a single-agent architecture, where one LLM processes all data. While effective for clean signals, this setup has key limitations: cognitive over-load with multi-modal, multi-position data, difficulty reconciling conflicting or noisy inputs, and vulnerability to sensor drift and spurious signals due to lack of specialization. Given these limitations of single-agent models, researchers have recently turned to multi-agent architectures as a potential solution. For example, GLOSS [ 14 ] utilizes a multi-agent LLM network for suggesting and correcting human activity annotations by triangu-lating self-reports and passive sensing data. MultiAgentsCR [ 29 ]introduces a collaborative reasoning framework that utilizes multi-ple role-playing agents to collaboratively analyze textual descrip-tions of human activities and simulate conference-style discussions for activity recognition. ConSensus [ 27 ] proposes a training-free multi-agent collaboration framework that decomposes multimodal sensing tasks into specialized, modality-aware agents. Despite these advancements, existing multi-agent sensing frameworks still ex-hibit notable limitations. They primarily focus on textual reasoning without invoking deterministic signal processing tools, lack explicit conflict resolution mechanisms for heterogeneous sensor place-ments, and assume fixed known positions, making them brittle to variations across users or deployment contexts. 

## 4 Design: The SensingAgents Architecture 

The SensingAgents framework is designed as a hierarchical, multi-layered system, each layer populated by specialized LLM-powered agents shown in Figure 3. This modular architecture decomposes complex IMU sensing into discrete stages, including raw signal acquisition and analysis, sophisticated conflict resolution, and the ultimate assessment. The system ensures that each task is han-dled by an optimized agent to achieve high accuracy and robust interpretability. 

## 4.1 The Analyst Agent: Position-Specific Expertise and Tool Integration 

The foundational layer of SensingAgents consists of position-specific analyst agents, including Arm, Wrist, Belt, and Pocket Analysts, each assigned to a distinct sensor position. These agents are re-sponsible for preprocessing and interpreting raw IMU data from their respective locations, leveraging specialized tools and domain knowledge to extract motion features. 

4.1.1 Agent Personas and Specializations. Each analyst agent is endowed with a distinct persona and a set of specialized capabilities tailored to the kinematic characteristics typically observed at its assigned body position: 

Arm Analyst : This agent monitors the upper arm to recognize coarse-grained movements such as lifting, reaching, and pushing. It distinguishes static postures (e.g., sitting) from active engage-ment (e.g., biking) by analyzing spatial orientation and motion trajectories. Technically, it decomposes raw signals into rotational and translational components, employing gravity compensation to isolate dynamic linear acceleration from gravitational artifacts, thereby capturing the underlying force of large-scale limb actions. 

Wrist Analyst : Positioned for fine-grained gesture recognition, this agent captures high-frequency hand movements and the rhyth-mic arm swings characteristic of locomotion. It specializes in iden-tifying periodic patterns—such as walking, jogging, or typing—by transforming time-series data into the frequency domain. Utilizing techniques like Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), it extracts dominant frequency peaks (e.g., 1.5–2.5 Hz for gait) and spectral energy to quantify the cadence and intensity of repetitive activities. 

Belt Analyst : Positioned near the body’s center of mass (e.g., on the hip or waist), this agent serves as the primary reference for gait analysis and postural stability. It excels at distinguishing static SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

postures from dynamic transitions by monitoring torso displace-ment and orientation. Utilizing statistical features such as mean acceleration magnitude and zero-crossing rates, the Belt Analyst characterizes movement periodicity and provides critical data for detecting high-impact events like falls or sudden changes in body alignment. 

Pocket Analyst : This agent focuses on lower-limb kinematics from a thigh-placed device, specializing in leg-driven activities such as cycling and stair negotiation. By correlating acceleration patterns with gravitational vectors, it infers changes in elevation and leg propulsion mechanics. It can differentiate between the distinct kinematic signatures of ascending versus descending stairs, for instance, by analyzing the phase relationships between vertical acceleration and angular velocity. 

4.1.2 Domain-Expert Tool Design: Bridging Numerical Precision and Semantic Reasoning. A fundamental limitation of applying LLMs to sensor data is the modality gap : LLMs excel at symbolic reasoning over natural language but lack the capacity to perform reliable numerical computation on raw time-series. Our ablation study confirms this limitation empirically—removing tool-calling drops accuracy from 79.5% to 60.7%, a degradation of nearly 20 percent-age points. This motivates our central design principle: decouple numerical feature extraction from semantic reasoning by equipping each analyst agent with a deterministic Domain-Expert Tools accessible via tool-calling. Unlike the code-generation method, where the LLM autonomously writes and executes signal processing code (frequently producing flawed pipelines or infinite loops, see Section Evaluation), our tools are human-designed, pre-verified modules grounded in domain ex-pertise from HAR research. Each tool transforms a raw IMU window 

x ∈ R𝑇 ×𝐶 (𝑇 samples, 𝐶 channels) into a compact semantic feature descriptor that the LLM can reason about in natural language. The toolbox is organized into three functional tiers based on discrimi-native purpose. 

Tier 1: Activity-Level Discrimination (Static vs. Dynamic). 

The first tier addresses the coarsest classification boundary. The 

Signal Magnitude Area (SMA) provides a scalar measure of overall motion intensity: SMA gyro = 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

 |𝜔 𝑡,𝑥 | + | 𝜔 𝑡,𝑦 | + | 𝜔 𝑡,𝑧 | (1) Based on the observed data distribution, SMA gyro exhibits a clear separation between activity classes: static activities yield very low values, whereas dynamic activities produce substantially larger ones. This distinct contrast enables the LLM agent to immediately narrow the hypothesis space. The complementary Statistical Feature Extraction tool computes per-channel mean 𝜇 𝑐 , standard deviation 

𝜎 𝑐 , and RMS alongside vector magnitudes ∥a𝑡 ∥ and ∥𝝎 𝑡 ∥, providing the agent with a quantitative “vital sign” of each sensor position. This tier eliminates the need for the LLM to mentally estimate variance from raw numerical sequences—a task at which language models demonstrably fail. 

Tier 2: Cadence and Periodicity Analysis. Once dynamic activity is established, the second tier disambiguates locomotion categories. 

> (a) The accelerometer readings on wrist when walking.
> (b) The accelerometer readings on wrist when jogging.

Figure 4: Even though jogging and walking are rhythmic dynamic movements, agents can make comprehensive judg-ments based on the amplitude of accelerometers at specific locations without inputting the entire time series. As shown in the figure, the amplitude and frequency of jogging are higher than walking, and our tailored tool can capture this information. 

The FFT Analysis tool applies the Discrete Fourier Transform: 

𝑋 𝑐 [𝑘 ] = 

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =0

𝑥 𝑡,𝑐 𝑒 − 𝑗 2𝜋𝑘𝑡 /𝑇 , 𝑘 = 0, 1, . . . , ⌊𝑇 /2⌋ (2) suppresses the DC component, and returns the top-3 dominant fre-quencies {𝑓 ∗ 

> 𝑘

} with amplitudes and spectral energy 𝐸 𝑐 = Í𝑘 |𝑋 𝑐 [𝑘 ]| 2.The dominant frequency directly encodes gait cadence, with jog-ging normally exhibiting a higher dominant frequency than walk-ing. The spectral energy ratio between the low band ( ≤2.5 Hz) and high band ( > 2.5 Hz) further separates rhythmic locomotion from irregular motion. Complementarily, the Step Detection tool identifies prominent peaks in the vertical acceleration 𝑎 𝑦 and computes the step fre-quency and regularity: 

ˆ𝑓 step = 1¯Δ𝜏 , regularity = 1 − 𝜎 Δ𝜏 

¯Δ𝜏 (3) where ¯Δ𝜏 is the mean inter-peak interval and 𝜎 Δ𝜏 its standard devi-ation. The Autocorrelation Periodicity tool validates these findings through the normalized autocorrelation: 

𝑅 (ℓ) =

Í𝑇 −1−ℓ𝑡 =0 (𝑎 𝑡,𝑦 − ¯𝑎 𝑦 )( 𝑎 𝑡 +ℓ,𝑦 − ¯𝑎 𝑦 )

Í𝑇 −1  

> 𝑡 =0

(𝑎 𝑡,𝑦 − ¯𝑎 𝑦 )2 (4) The first peak 𝑅 (ℓ∗) > 0.2 yields the stride period, which the LLM can cross-reference with FFT results. This dual-verification design is critical: the ablation without tool-calling shows that LLMs, when forced to infer periodicity from raw numbers alone, frequently hallucinate cadence values. 

Tier 3: Fine-Grained Disambiguation. The most challenging classification boundaries (e.g., upstairs vs. downstairs) require fea-tures that encode subtle biomechanical asymmetries. The Vertical Asymmetry Analysis tool computes three discriminative quantities Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhimeng Yin 

from the vertical acceleration 𝑎 𝑦 :

𝛾 𝑦 = 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

 𝑎 𝑡,𝑦 − 𝜇 𝑦 

𝜎 𝑦 

3

, 𝜂 = 𝐸 +

𝐸 + + 𝐸 − (5) where 𝛾 𝑦 is the skewness (upstairs: 𝛾 𝑦 > 0, positive-dominant push; downstairs: 𝛾 𝑦 < 0, impact-dominant) and 𝜂 is the positive-to-total energy ratio. A peak-valley amplitude ratio 𝜌 pv = ¯𝐴 +/ ¯𝐴 − captures the asymmetry in vertical impacts. These features are inaccessible to pure LLM reasoning because they require precise numerical integration over the acceleration distribution. Wrist Agent Report          

> "position": "wrist",
> "predicted_activity ": "walking",
> "confidence": 0.82 ,
> "key_features ": "13 steps detected , accel_y dominating (mean=
> -10.22), gyro_SMA =2.34,……. "
> "signal_quality ": "good",
> "reasoning": "Step frequency of 2.24 Hz and dominant frequency
> of 1.83 Hz are in the walking cadence range …...”

Figure 5: The wrist analyst agent report, which will be sent to the downstream agents for further analysis. 

Upon completing the analysis, each analyst agent emits a struc-tured report, as shown in Fig 5. This structured interface encodes both quantitative evidence and natural-language Chain-of-Thought rationale, decoupling position-specific sensing from downstream conflict resolution. The Advocate Agents receive not raw numbers but semantically grounded feature summaries, a representation that directly supports dialectical debate. 

## 4.2 The Advocate Agent: Dialectical Debate for Conflict Resolution 

The Advocate Agent constitutes the second layer of SensingAgents, tasked with resolving the inter-position conflicts that arise when analyst reports disagree. Rather than relying on simple majority vot-ing, the system employs a structured adversarial debate mechanism between two opposing advocate agents. 

4.2.1 The Dynamic and Static Debate Protocol. When the Analyst Team’s reports exhibit inconsistencies or present conflicting activity classifications, for example, if the Wrist Analyst suggests “Walk-ing” (due to arm swing) while the Belt Analyst suggests “Standing” (due to minimal torso movement), the Advocate Agents initiate a dialectical debate. This process involves two specialized researcher agents: 

• Dynamic Activity Advocate : This agent is programmed to advocate for a more dynamic, higher-intensity activity state. Its persona is to seek evidence that supports move-ment, change, and higher energy expenditure. It reviews all Analyst Reports, prioritizing those that indicate significant motion, higher magnitudes of acceleration, or faster angu-lar velocities. It will construct arguments emphasizing the most active sensor readings and attempt to contextualize or downplay contradictory static readings (e.g., arguing that a static belt reading might be due to a brief pause during a dynamic activity). 

• Static Activity Advocate : Conversely, this agent is tasked with advocating for a more static or lower-intensity activity state. Its persona is to identify and emphasize evidence that suggests minimal movement, stability, or lower energy ex-penditure. It scrutinizes Analyst Reports for indications of stillness, low acceleration magnitudes, or consistent orienta-tion. It will construct arguments highlighting static sensor readings and attempt to explain away dynamic readings as artifacts, noise, or non-activity-related movements (e.g., at-tributing a wrist sensor’s dynamic reading to fidgeting rather than locomotion). Round 1        

> Movement Evidence: …
> Dynamic Activity Identification: ...
> Rebuttal to Static Interpretation: …
> Conclsion : …
> Round 1
> Stillness Evidence: …
> Static Activity Identification: ...
> Rebuttal to Dynamic Interpretation: …
> Conclsion : …

……       

> Dynamic State Advocate Agent Static State Advocate Agent
> N Rounds

Figure 6: A round debate example of dynamic and static ad-vocate agent. 

These two agents engage in a structured, multi-round discourse to reconcile divergent sensor interpretations: (1) Initial Stance : Each advocate agent presents its initial activ-ity hypothesis and the strongest supporting evidence from the Analyst Reports. (2) Evidence Presentation : Agents take turns presenting addi-tional evidence, counter-arguments, and justifications, draw-ing upon the detailed features and confidence scores pro-vided in the Analyst Reports. They can also request further analysis from the Analyst Team if specific data points require deeper scrutiny. (3) Cross-Examination : Agents actively challenge each other’s interpretations, probing for weaknesses in the presented evidence or alternative explanations for observed sensor patterns. For instance, the Dynamic Advocate might ask the Static Advocate to explain a sudden spike in vertical acceleration if advocating for ’Standing’. (4) Rebuttal and Refinement : Based on the cross-examination, agents refine their arguments, acknowledge limitations, or introduce new supporting evidence. This iterative process continues for a predetermined number of rounds or until a clear convergence or divergence of opinion is established. This dialectical process ensures rigorous multi-perspective ap-praisal, mitigating biases from localized or misleading sensor sig-nals. By replacing black-box statistical aggregation with transpar-ent, cross-validated reasoning, the framework significantly bolsters both the robustness and interpretability of the HAR system. 

## 4.3 The Decision Agent: The Ultimate Arbiter 

The Decision Agent serves as the definitive arbiter within the SensingAgents framework, functioning as a critical safeguard for system reliability. Its role is indispensable in high-stakes domains—such as mobile health monitoring, geriatric care, and human-robot col-laboration, where erroneous activity classifications can have severe SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Algorithm 1 SensingAgents Inference Pipeline 

Input: Raw IMU windows {x(𝑖 ) }𝑁 𝑖 =1, toolbox T , LLM L

Output: Predicted activity ˆ𝑦 , confidence ˆ𝑐 , reasoning chain E 

> 1:

/* Stage 1: Position-Specific Analysis (parallel) */  

> 2:

for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑁 in parallel do  

> 3:

Initialize analyst agent A𝑖 with position-specific prompt  

> 4:

𝑟 𝑖 ( ˆ𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 , f𝑖 , 𝑒 𝑖 ) ← L ReAct (A 𝑖 , x(𝑖 ) , T ) {Iterative feature ex-traction & reporting}  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

/* Stage 2: Dialectical Debate */  

> 7:

ℎ0 ← { 𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑟 𝑁 } {initial evidence}  

> 8:

for 𝑗 = 1 to 𝑅 do  

> 9:

𝑑 + 

> 𝑗

← L( DynAdv , ℎ 𝑗 −1) ; 𝑑 − 

> 𝑗

← L( StaAdv , ℎ 𝑗 −1, 𝑑 + 

> 𝑗

) 

> 10:

ℎ𝑗 ← ℎ𝑗 −1 ∪ { 𝑑 + 

> 𝑗

, 𝑑 − 

> 𝑗

} 

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

/* Stage 3: Decision Synthesis */  

> 13:

ˆ𝑦, ˆ𝑐, E ← L( Advocate , {𝑟 𝑖 }, ℎ 𝑅 ) 

> 14:

return ˆ𝑦, ˆ𝑐, E

consequences. By performing a multi-criteria synthesis of the An-alyst reports and the Advocate’s dialectical outcomes, this agent ensures that final determinations are grounded in physically coher-ent evidence rather than isolated signal patterns. Specifically, the Decision Agent is tasked with resolving ambigu-ity when the adversarial debate fails to yield a stable consensus or when confidence metrics remain below a predefined threshold. It proactively intervenes to weigh conflicting evidence, such as recon-ciling high-intensity limb movements with stationary torso data, to prevent premature or erroneous inferences. Beyond producing a dis-crete activity label, the agent generates a comprehensive diagnostic output comprising a quantitative confidence score and a natural language "Chain of Thought" (CoT) explanation. This explanation systematically decomposes the underlying reasoning by citing spe-cific feature alignments and cross-agent validation results. Such transparency transforms the traditionally "black-box" sensing pro-cess into an interpretable narrative, fostering the auditability and user trust essential for seamless deployment in real-world assistive technologies. 

## 4.4 End-to-End Inference Pipeline 

The SensingAgents pipeline formalizes the transition from raw IMU signals to interpreted activity labels through a three-stage hierarchical process. Let P = {𝑝 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1 denote the 𝑁 sensor positions and x(𝑖 ) ∈ R𝑇 ×𝐶 the corresponding raw data windows. The activity label space is Y. Let L denote the underlying LLM and T the signal processing toolbox. The inference procedure, detailed in Algorithm 1, is structured as follows: 

Stage 1: Position-Specific Analysis. Each sensor position is assigned an independent analyst agent A𝑖 operating in parallel. We employ a ReAct prompting strategy, allowing agents to iteratively invoke signal processing tools T to extract discriminative features. This stage culminates in 𝑁 structured reports 𝑟 𝑖 , which encapsulate local predictions ˆ𝑦 𝑖 , confidence 𝑐 𝑖 , key feature vector f𝑖 , and the underlying physical evidence e𝑖 .

Stage 2: Dialectical Debate. implements the Dynamic-Static dialectical debate. At each round 𝑗 , the Dynamic Advocate 𝑑 + 

> 𝑗

con-structs arguments for higher-intensity activities by citing evidence from the analyst reports, and the Static Advocate 𝑑 − 

> 𝑗

counters with evidence for lower-intensity states. The debate history ℎ𝑗 accumu-lates arguments for downstream synthesis. In practice, 𝑅 =2 rounds suffice for convergence in 85% of cases. 

Stage 3: Decision Synthesis. The Decision Agent acts as the final arbiter, evaluating the accumulated debate history ℎ𝑅 against the primary evidence from analyst reports. It synthesizes these inputs to produce the final classification ˆ𝑦 , a quantitative confidence score ˆ𝑐 , and a natural language reasoning chain E for enhanced interpretability. 

## 5 Evaluation 

The evaluation of SensingAgents is designed to rigorously assess its performance and robustness across multiple dimensions. 

## 5.1 Dataset and Experimental Setup 

Our evaluation utilizes the widely recognized Shoaib dataset [ 20 ], a publicly available benchmark specifically designed for multi-sensor HAR. This dataset captures IMU data from ten participants per-forming seven distinct daily activities: Walking, Jogging, Sitting, Standing, Biking, Upstairs, and Downstairs. The data was recorded using smartphones strategically placed at five body positions: right jeans pocket, left jeans pocket, belt, right upper arm, and right wrist, capturing 3D accelerometer and gyroscope data at a 50 Hz sampling rate. To prepare the data, we segmented the continuous IMU streams into 2-second windows with a 50% overlap. We established several robust baseline models for a comprehensive comparison: (1) Traditional Machine Learning (SVM) [9 ]: A supervised machine learning model grounded in the principle of maxi-mum margin, designed to analyze data for classification and regression tasks. (2) Deep Learning (IMU-BERT) [24 ]: A state-of-the-art deep learning model, which adapts the BERT architecture for IMU data. It learns robust representations to boost HAR perfor-mance with limited labels. (3) Single-Agent (with original data) : A single LLM agent tasked with processing the unoptimized multi-sensor time-series data directly. (4) Single-Agent LLM (based on HARGPT [ 12 ]) : A single LLM agent processing downsampled and statistical sensor data with designed tools. (5) Multi-Agent (Code Generation [ 4, 18 ]) : An LLM-generated multi-agent framework that attempts to solve the task by generating and executing code without human-expert de-sign. SensingAgents was implemented using LangGraph with Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the foundation model for all agents. All LLM-based methods were evaluated under zero-shot conditions (no task-specific training data). 

## 5.2 Overall Performance Comparison 

The overall performance is summarized in Figure 7 and Table 3. Within the zero shot regime, a clear performance hierarchy emerges among LLM based methods. The Single-Agent LLM with original Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhimeng Yin 

data achieves only 30.2%, confirming that current LLMs cannot reliably interpret raw, high frequency IMU time series. Optimized Single-Agent based on HARGPT, via downsampling and statistics, raises accuracy to 50.5%, yet forcing a single model to reason over all sensor positions simultaneously still induces cognitive overload and hallucinations. The Multi-Agent (Code Generation) baseline improves further to 61.3% through multi-agent decomposition, but its LLM generated signal processing pipelines frequently produce unreliable code, including infinite loops and statistically flawed feature extractors, underscoring the necessity of human designed domain tools. Single-Agent 

> (Original)
> Single-Agent
> (Optimized)
> Multi-Agent
> (Code Gen.)
> SensingAgents
> (Ours)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Accuracy (%)
> 30.2%
> 50.5%
> 61.3%
> 79.5%

Figure 7: Overall classification performance across agent-based models. Table 3: Performance comparison with supervised learning methods under different conditions. Model / Method Seen Users Unseen Users Decline 

SVM 85.2% 71.3% -13.9% IMU-BERT 98.4% 70.1% -28.3% 

SensingAgents (Ours) ——% 79.5% 0% 

SensingAgents achieves 79.5% accuracy, outperforming the best single-agent baseline by around 40 percentage points. Two design principles underpin this gain. First, expert designed signal pro-cessing tools, such as FFT analysis, step detection, and vertical asymmetry, offload numerically demanding computations from the LLM, providing compact feature descriptors that ground reasoning in physical quantities. Our ablation confirms that tool calling alone contributes approximately 20 percentage points. Second, position-specific analyst decomposition paired with dialectical debate en-ables principled resolution of inter-sensor conflicts that confound monolithic architectures. On the other hand, Table 3 reveals a generalization advantage of SensingAgents. In this evaluation, we use data from a single user for training and treat the remaining nine users as unseen users to assess cross-user generalization. Although supervised models achieve the highest absolute accuracy with labeled training data and seen user condition, SVM and IMU-BERT suffer 13.9% and 28.3% accuracy decline on unseen users, respectively, because their learned repre-sentations overfit to participant-specific motion patterns present in training data. All zero-shot LLM methods, including SensingA-gents, maintain identical performance across seen and unseen users. SensingAgents achieves the highest absolute accuracy (79.5%), es-tablishing it as the most robust zero-shot approach. It requires no task-specific training, and its modular architecture is designed to benefit directly from improvements in future foundation models without architectural modification. 

## 5.3 Per-Class Classification Analysis 

Figure 8 shows the full confusion matrix across seven activities, revealing three failure modes that per-class accuracy masks. Walking  

> Jogging
> Biking
> Sitting
> Standing
> Upstairs
> Downstairs
> Predicted Activity
> Walking
> Jogging
> Biking
> Sitting
> Standing
> Upstairs
> Downstairs
> True Activity
> 95%
> 92%
> 89%
> 69%
> 72%
> 63%
> 65% 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Fraction of true-class samples (%)

Figure 8: Confusion matrix of SensingAgents. Darker diag-onal cells indicate higher per-class accuracy; off-diagonal mass reveals systematic confusion pairs. Observation 1 — Static postural confusion (Sitting ↔ Stand-ing). These activities form the largest off-diagonal cluster ( 25% and 22% mutual error) due to shared near-zero accelerometer and gyroscope variance. Disambiguation relies on subtle gravity vector shifts ( 𝑎 𝑧 vs. 𝑎 𝑦 ), which are highly sensitive to device orientation. This lack of distinct kinematic evidence leads to low-confidence draws during agent arbitration. 

Observation 2 — Stair activities misidentified as level-ground walking. Upstairs and Downstairs frequently leak toward Walking (20% and 18%) because all three share similar rhythmic cadences (1.8–2.2 Hz). The evaluation windows are too short for Tier-3 asym-metry tools like acceleration skewness ( 𝛾 𝑦 ) to reliably distinguish them, a problem compounded by inconsistent sensor positioning. 

Observation 3 — Stair direction confusion (Upstairs ↔ Down-stairs). A secondary error cluster (13–14%) exists between stair directions. While positive vs. negative skewness should theoreti-cally differentiate upward pushes from downward impacts, these estimates remain unstable across short windows, as asymmetry signatures invert depending on the gait cycle sampling. Dynamic activities (Walking 95.1%, Jogging 91.7%, Biking 88.5%) are reliable due to strong periodic signatures, negligible cross-class confusion. These findings establish a clear priority ordering for im-provement: postural disambiguation requires orientation-invariant features, stair-vs-walking separation requires longer evaluation windows, and stair-direction discrimination requires more precise temporal alignment of the asymmetry analysis window. 

## 5.4 Impact of LLM Foundation Models 

To understand how different foundation models affect framework performance, we evaluated SensingAgents using various LLMs as the reasoning engine (Table 4). SensingAgents maintains strong per-formance across all evaluated models, with accuracies from 73.4% (Deepseek-chat) to 79.5% (Claude Sonnet 4.6), confirming that archi-tectural design provides consistent gains regardless of the specific SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 4: Performance across different LLM Foundation Mod-els Foundation Model Accuracy 

GPT-5-mini 74.1% Deepseek-chat 73.4% MiniMax-2.7 78.6% GLM-4.7 77.9% Claude-Sonnet-4.6 79.5% 

model. The five models span a balanced range of providers, scales, and cost tiers, enabling practical trade-off analysis between accu-racy and inference cost. A general trend shows models with stronger reasoning capacity and larger scale perform better (MiniMax-2.7, GLM-4.7, Claude Sonnet-4.6). However, the performance spread is narrow (approximately 6 percentage points), indicating Sensin-gAgents provides a substantial and consistent performance floor. We attribute this to the signal processing toolbox offloading nu-merically demanding computations from the LLM, allowing even moderately capable models to reason effectively over compact se-mantic descriptors. Consequently, a natural performance ceiling emerges: once an LLM reliably interprets feature summaries and follows ReAct rea-soning loops, further model scaling yields diminishing returns. Our experiments suggest this ceiling is approximately 80% under the current design, pointing to tool quality and dataset complex-ity as the primary bottlenecks rather than model capability alone. Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves the highest average accuracy across multiple independent runs. Nevertheless, for inference latency and cost efficiency, Deepseek-chat presents a compelling alternative, delivering competitive performance at substantially lower cost per token, making it a practical choice for high-throughput or resource-constrained deployments where the modest accuracy trade-off is acceptable. 

## 5.5 Token Consumption Analysis 

A practical concern for LLM-based sensing systems is inference cost, which scales with the number of tokens consumed per classification. Figure 9 reports token usage per sample. SensingAgents averages 62,040 tokens, with 49.4K input and 12.6K output tokens. Analysts account for 60.5% of consumption, while the Debate and Decision agents use 20.8% and 18.6% respectively. Two structural insights emerge from this distribution. Insight 1: Costs are prompt-bound. The 4:1 input-to-output ratio indicates that expenditure is driven by fixed overhead like system prompts. This is especially clear in the analyst stage (5.7:1) compared to the debate stage (1.7:1), where agents generate more reasoning. Consequently, prompt compression and schema optimization are the primary levers for cost reduction. Insight 2: Debate efficiency. 

The Advocate Debate is highly efficient, delivering a 11.3% accuracy boost for only 20.8% of the token budget (ablation study). While analysts represent a necessary architectural cost, the debate stage offers the highest return on investment. Refining debate prompts with targeted cues provides a clear path for future optimization. Compared to a 15,000-token Single-Agent baseline, SensingA-gents uses 4x more tokens but increases accuracy from 50.5% to 79.5%. This non-linear relationship reflects a qualitative shift in rea-soning: from more LLM calls to decomposed position-local reason-ing with deterministic signal processing. The modular architecture also reduces cost—skipping analysts for unavailable or unreliable sensors cuts token consumption proportionally without architec-tural changes. 

## 5.6 Inference Speed Analysis 

Figure 10 reports the average end-to-end inference latency per sample across five LLM backends, measured as the total wall-clock time for all pipeline stages to complete. DeepSeek-chat achieves the lowest latency at 23 s per sample, making it the most practical back-end for latency-sensitive deployments. GPT-5-mini follows at 28 s, while Claude Sonnet-4.6, GLM-4.7, and MiniMax-2.7 require 55 s, 72 s, and 83 s respectively, primarily due to higher per-token gener-ation latency. Notably, the latency-accuracy trade-off is significant. While Claude Sonnet-4.6 yields the highest accuracy, DeepSeek-chat offers a 3× speed advantage with competitive accuracy, making it the most practical choice for resource-constrained or real-time deployments. In practice, inference latency can be substantially reduced through three complementary strategies: (i) Token bud-geting —constraining system prompt length and feature descriptor verbosity; and (ii) Adaptive debate truncation —skipping the sec-ond debate round when the first round achieves high-confidence consensus. These optimizations are particularly relevant for edge deployments. 

## 5.7 Ablation Study 

To validate the contribution of each architectural component within SensingAgents, we conducted an ablation study by systematically removing key features. The results reveal a clear hierarchy of component importance. Position-specific analysts deliver the largest performance gain, im-proving accuracy by 23.2 percentage points over flat input, confirm-ing that LLMs benefit fundamentally from decomposed, position-local reasoning. Tool-calling provides the second-largest gain of 18.8 percentage points, validating our core hypothesis that deterministic signal processing tools are essential for grounding LLM reasoning in precise numerical features. The dialectical debate contributes an additional 11.3 percentage points over naive majority voting, demonstrating its value in resolving ambiguous cases where ana-lyst reports conflict. The full SensingAgents model achieves 79.5% accuracy, substantially outperforming all ablated variants with the lowest standard deviation (1.4), indicating consistent and robust performance. 

## 6 Discussion 

In this section, we discuss current limitations and outline directions for future work. First, our evaluation is restricted to a single dataset collected under controlled sensor placements. As a result, general-ization to free-living scenarios with arbitrary device orientations and missing sensors remains an open challenge. To address this, we plan to extend our evaluation to self-collected datasets and assess cross-domain robustness. Second, the current tool design depends heavily on human domain expertise. While effective, this reliance may limit scalability. A promising direction is automated tool syn-thesis, where the LLM proposes new feature extraction functions Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Naiyu Zheng, Tianlong Yu, Haochen Yin, Xiaoyi Fan, Xiping Hu, and Zhimeng Yin Analyst Agents  

> (×5)
> Advocate
> Debate (×2)
> Decision
> Agent
> 0
> 4,000
> 8,000
> 12,000
> 16,000
> 20,000
> 24,000
> 28,000
> 32,000
> 36,000
> Token Count
> 37,547
> 12,934 11,559
> 31,973
> 5,574
> 8,111
> 4,823
> 9,323
> 2,236
> Input Tokens
> Output Tokens

Figure 9: Average token consumption per sample, broken down by pipeline stage and token type (input vs. output). DeepSeek  

> -chat
> GPT-5
> -mini
> Claude
> Sonnet-4.6
> GLM-4.7 MiniMax
> -2.7
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 23s
> 28s
> 55s
> 72s
> 83s
> Best Latency
> Other Backends
> Fastest: DeepSeek-chat (23s)

Figure 10: Average end-to-end inference time per sample across five LLM back-ends. w/o Position- 

> Specific Analysts
> (Flat Input)
> w/o Tool Calling
> (Text Reasoning
> Only)
> w/o Debate
> (Majority
> Voting)
> Full
> SensingAgents
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 85
> 90
> Accuracy (%)
> Position-Specific Analysts
> Tool Calling
> Debate / Majority Voting
> Full SensingAgents
> Error bar: ±1 over 5 runs
> 56.3±3.2%
> 60.7±2.5%
> 68.2±2.8%
> 79.5±1.4%

Figure 11: Ablation study of SensingA-gents components, includes error bars to quantify stability. 

and validates them on a held-out calibration set, potentially un-covering more discriminative features beyond the existing toolbox. Finally, post-training strategies based on agentic reinforcement learning offer another avenue for improvement. By optimizing the debate and decision agents using classification feedback, such meth-ods may further narrow the gap with fully supervised approaches. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We presented SensingAgents, a multi-agent collaborative frame-work that decomposes multi-position IMU activity recognition into three specialized layers: position-specific analyst agents with domain-expert tool-calling, adversarial Dynamic-Static advocate agents for conflict resolution, and a decision agent for reliability inference. On the Shoaib benchmark, SensingAgents achieves 79.5% accuracy in a zero-shot setting, outperforming single-agent LLM baselines by over 50 percentage points and supervised models un-der unseen conditions by 9 percentage points. Our ablation study confirms that each architectural component contributes measurably to the final performance. These results demonstrate that structured multi-agent reasoning can effectively bridge the modality gap be-tween language models and sensor data, opening new directions for trustworthy, interpretable AI in ubiquitous sensing. 

## References 

[1] Yasmin Abdelaal, Michaël Aupetit, Abdelkader Baggag, and Dena Al-Thani. 2024. Exploring the applications of explainability in wearable data analytics: Systematic literature review. Journal of Medical Internet Research 26 (2024), e53863. [2] Aisha Alansari and Hamzah Luqman. 2025. Large language models hallucination: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06265 (2025). [3] Tuo An, Yunjiao Zhou, Han Zou, and Jianfei Yang. 2026. IoT-LLM: A framework for enhancing large language model reasoning from real-world sensor data. 

Patterns 7, 1 (2026). [4] Anthropic. 2026. Claude Code. https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code. [5] Sheikh Asif Imran Shouborno, Mohammad Nur Hossain Khan, Subrata Biswas, and Bashima Islam. 2025. LLaSA: A Sensor-Aware LLM for Natural Language Reasoning of Human Activity from IMU Data. In Companion of the 2025 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 893–899. [6] Cho-Chun Chiu, Tuan Nguyen, Ting He, Shiqiang Wang, Beom-Su Kim, and Ki Il Kim. 2024. Active learning for wban-based health monitoring. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing . 231–240. [7] Ilker Demirel, Karan Thakkar, Benjamin Elizalde, Miquel Espi Marques, Aditya Sarathy, Yang Bai, Umamahesh Srinivas, Jiajie Xu, Shirley Ren, and Jaya Narain. 2025. Using LLMs for Late Multimodal Sensor Fusion for Activity Recognition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10729 (2025). [8] Emilio Ferrara. 2024. Large language models for wearable sensor-based human activity recognition, health monitoring, and behavioral modeling: a survey of early trends, datasets, and challenges. Sensors 24, 15 (2024), 5045. [9] Marti A. Hearst, Susan T Dumais, Edgar Osuna, John Platt, and Bernhard Scholkopf. 1998. Support vector machines. IEEE Intelligent Systems and their applications 13, 4 (1998), 18–28. [10] Zhiqing Hong, Yiwei Song, Zelong Li, Anlan Yu, Shuxin Zhong, Yi Ding, Tian He, and Desheng Zhang. 2025. LLM4HAR: Generalizable On-device Human Activity Recognition with Pretrained LLMs. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 4511–4521. [11] Jeya Vikranth Jeyakumar, Ankur Sarker, Luis Antonio Garcia, and Mani Sri-vastava. 2023. X-char: A concept-based explainable complex human activity recognition model. Proceedings of the ACM on interactive, mobile, wearable and ubiquitous technologies 7, 1 (2023), 1–28. [12] Sijie Ji, Xinzhe Zheng, and Chenshu Wu. 2024. Hargpt: Are llms zero-shot human activity recognizers?. In 2024 IEEE International Workshop on Foundation Models for Cyber-Physical Systems & Internet of Things (FMSys) . IEEE, 38–43. [13] Minwoo Kim, Jaechan Cho, Seongjoo Lee, and Yunho Jung. 2019. IMU sensor-based hand gesture recognition for human-machine interfaces. Sensors 19, 18 (2019), 3827. [14] Ha Le, Akshat Choube, Vedant Das Swain, Varun Mishra, and Stephen Intille. 2025. A Multi-Agent LLM Network for Suggesting and Correcting Human Activity and Posture Annotations. In Companion of the 2025 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 877–884. [15] Zechen Li, Baiyu Chen, Hao Xue, and Flora D Salim. 2025. Zara: Zero-shot motion time-series analysis via knowledge and retrieval driven llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04038 (2025). [16] Zechen Li, Shohreh Deldari, Linyao Chen, Hao Xue, and Flora D Salim. 2025. Sensorllm: Aligning large language models with motion sensors for human activity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 354–379. [17] Andrea Mannini and Angelo Maria Sabatini. 2010. Machine learning methods for classifying human physical activity from on-body accelerometers. Sensors 10, 2 (2010), 1154–1175. [18] OpenClaw. 2025. OpenClaw. https://openclaw.ai/. [19] Francisco Javier Ordóñez and Daniel Roggen. 2016. Deep convolutional and lstm recurrent neural networks for multimodal wearable activity recognition. Sensors 

16, 1 (2016), 115. [20] Muhammad Shoaib, Stephan Bosch, Ozlem Durmaz Incel, Hans Scholten, and Paul JM Havinga. 2014. Fusion of smartphone motion sensors for physical activity recognition. Sensors 14, 6 (2014), 10146–10176. [21] Qin Tang, Jing Liang, and Fangqi Zhu. 2023. A comparative review on multi-modal sensors fusion based on deep learning. Signal Processing 213 (2023), 109165. [22] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al . 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 24824–24837. [23] Huatao Xu, Liying Han, Qirui Yang, Mo Li, and Mani Srivastava. 2024. Penetra-tive ai: Making llms comprehend the physical world. In Proceedings of the 25th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications . 1–7. [24] Huatao Xu, Pengfei Zhou, Rui Tan, Mo Li, and Guobin Shen. 2021. Limu-bert: Unleashing the potential of unlabeled data for imu sensing applications. In 

Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems .220–233. [25] Hua Yan, Heng Tan, Yi Ding, Pengfei Zhou, Vinod Namboodiri, and Yu Yang. 2025. Large Language Model-guided Semantic Alignment for Human Activity Recog-nition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 9, 4 (2025), 1–25. [26] Yifan Yan, Shuai Yang, Xiuzhen Guo, Xiangguang Wang, Wei Chow, Yuanchao Shu, and Shibo He. 2025. mmExpert: Integrating Large Language Models for Comprehensive mmWave Data Synthesis and Understanding. In Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing . 1–10. SensingAgents: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Robust IMU Activity Recognition Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

[27] Hyungjun Yoon, Mohammad Malekzadeh, Sung-Ju Lee, Fahim Kawsar, and Lorena Qendro. 2026. ConSensus: Multi-Agent Collaboration for Multimodal Sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.06453 (2026). [28] Fusang Zhang, Jie Xiong, Zhaoxin Chang, Junqi Ma, and Daqing Zhang. 2022. Mobi2Sense: empowering wireless sensing with mobility. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing And Networking . 268– 281. [29] Yilin Zhao, Yihong Chen, Rui Tang, and Wenjie Zhao. 2025. MultiagentsCR: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Reasoning Framework Based on LLM for Human Activity Recognition. In 2025 10th International Conference on Information Science, Computer Technology and Transportation (ISCTT) . IEEE, 90–95. [30] Huiyu Zhou and Huosheng Hu. 2007. Inertial sensors for motion detection of human upper limbs. Sensor Review 27, 2 (2007), 151–158. [31] Xiaokang Zhou, Wei Liang, Kevin I-Kai Wang, Hao Wang, Laurence T. Yang, and Qun Jin. 2020. Deep-Learning-Enhanced Human Activity Recognition for Internet of Healthcare Things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7, 7 (2020), 6429– 6438. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2020.2985082