Title: Reasoning Matters: Mitigate Hallucination in Multimodal Large Reasoning Models via Reasoning-Conditioned Preference Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27906v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:47:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Reasoning Matters: Mitigate Hallucination in Multimodal Large Reasoning Models via Reasoning-Conditioned Preference Optimization 

Jiawei Kong 1* Hao Fang 1* Shunxiang Liao 2 Jinyu Li 2

Bin Chen 2† Hao Wu 1 Shu-Tao Xia 2 Min Zhang 2 

> 1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University  

> 2

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 

kjw25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, fangh25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Multimodal Large Reasoning Models intro-duce the reasoning paradigm, demonstrating strong capabilities on complex vision-language tasks. However, they still suffer from severe hallucinations. Existing training-based meth-ods typically mitigate hallucinations through response-level direct preference optimization (DPO), where the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) and the final answer are treated as a monolithic output and optimized jointly. We reveal that this formulation performs similarly to answer-only optimization, suggesting that it primarily learns answer-level preference, while leaving CoT-level supervision insufficiently exploited. To address this issue, we explicitly formu-late a CoT-oriented preference term and derive Reasoning-Conditioned Direct Preference Op-timization (RC-DPO), which models the CoT as a condition for answer generation and con-trasts the preference for the same preferred an-swer under different CoT conditions, promot-ing answer-supportive reasoning chain align-ment. To further improve optimization, we in-troduce a reasoning-enhanced preference data generation strategy that employs Monte Carlo Tree Search to discover visually grounded and logically consistent CoTs as positive samples, and attention-guided CoT token pruning to con-struct negative ones. Extensive experiments across various models and benchmarks show that RC-DPO effectively mitigates hallucina-tions and improves the reliability of the multi-modal reasoning process. 

1 Introduction 

Large Reasoning Models (LRMs), such as Ope-nAI o3 and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), have recently achieved remarkable progress on various tasks by explicitly generating intermediate reason-ing steps before producing final responses (Cobbe et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). Building upon this, 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. <think> The image shows a vintage truck with color-         

> ful and religious artwork on it, parked in a desert-
> like setting. There is a structure in the background that
> appears to be a small building or shed, and there is a table
> visible in the foreground to the right of the truck. The
> table is round and has a blue top, which is typical for a
> dining table. However, the context and the setting suggest
> that this might be a display or a part of an art installation
> rather than a functional dining area. Nonetheless, the pre-
> sence of the table is clear in the image. </think>
> Is there a dining
> table in the image?
> <answer> Final answer: yes </answer>

Figure 1: A visual question answering example gener-ated by MM-Eureka-7B (Meng et al., 2025), where the hallucinated content is highlighted in red. 

Multimodal Large Reasoning Models (MLRMs) (Meng et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025a; Leng et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2026) extend such reasoning capabilities to vision-language scenarios. Further enhanced by post-training techniques such as re-inforcement learning, these models have achieved substantial gains on challenging multimodal tasks, including visual mathematics (Lu et al., 2024), sci-entific question answering (Lu et al., 2022), and chart understanding (Masry et al., 2022). Despite their strong performance, recent studies (Xu et al., 2026; Fang et al., 2026a) have shown that MLRMs remain prone to hallucinations, gen-erating content that appears plausible yet is incon-sistent with the visual input. Unlike conventional Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), hallucinations in MLRMs can arise not only in the final answer but also within the intermediate Chain-of-Thought (CoT), as illustrated in Figure 1. This poses a unique challenge for hallucination mitiga-tion: unsupported visual evidence, such as nonex-1

> arXiv:2605.27906v1 [cs.AI] 27 May 2026

istent objects or relations, may first emerge in the CoT and then propagate to the final answer through subsequent reasoning steps. Therefore, mitigating hallucinations in MLRMs requires moving beyond answer-level correction toward the explicit align-ment of intermediate reasoning chains. Recent studies have explored post-alignment methods for mitigating hallucinations in MLRMs, with Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) com-monly employed to align model outputs with cu-rated preference pairs (Yu et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). However, these methods typically con-struct preference pairs over complete responses, where the CoT and final answer are concatenated and jointly optimized under a single response-level preference signal. While such coarse-grained su-pervision can reduce hallucinations to some extent, it does not explicitly distinguish CoT-level align-ment from answer-level alignment. As a result, the optimization may be biased toward answer-level shortcuts , leaving the reasoning chain insufficiently optimized and limiting the overall effectiveness of hallucination mitigation. This raises a natural ques-tion: How can we move beyond response-level pref-erence optimization and explicitly align reasoning chains with the correct answer? 

To address this, we propose Reasoning-

Conditioned Direct Preference Optimization (RC-DPO), a fine-grained preference optimization framework that explicitly models the relationship between reasoning chains and final answers. In-stead of only comparing complete responses, RC-DPO treats the CoT as a condition for answer gen-eration and contrasts the likelihood of the same preferred answer under different CoT conditions. Specifically, given a multimodal input and a pre-ferred answer, RC-DPO encourages the model to assign higher preference to the answer when condi-tioned on a visually grounded and logically valid CoT than on a hallucinated or corrupted CoT. By isolating the effect of the reasoning chain, this controlled comparison enables the model to bet-ter distinguish quality differences between reason-ing chains and provides a direct signal for learning answer-supportive CoT preferences. To support this objective, we further construct reasoning-conditioned preference data by search-ing for high-quality positive reasoning chains with Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), and generat-ing negative reasoning chains through an attention-guided CoT token pruning strategy that removes vi-sually salient CoT tokens. By combining response-level preference optimization with reasoning-conditioned preference learning, RC-DPO explic-itly aligns intermediate reasoning chains with the answers they support, enabling more faithful multi-modal reasoning. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We revisit existing DPO-based hallucination mitigation methods for MLRMs and reveal that their coarse-grained supervision may leave CoT insufficiently optimized. • We propose RC-DPO, a fine-grained prefer-ence optimization framework that aligns rea-soning chains by contrasting the same pre-ferred answer under different CoT conditions. • We further introduce a reasoning-conditioned preference data generation pipeline with MCTS-based positive sampling and attention-guided negative construction. • Experimental results on four MLRMs across nine benchmarks demonstrate the effective-ness of RC-DPO in mitigating hallucinations and improving multimodal reasoning ability. 

2 Observation and Motivation 

In this section, we present the motivation behind our RC-DPO for mitigating hallucinations in ML-RMs. We first provide evidence of insufficient CoT optimization from two complementary perspec-tives, i.e. , training dynamics and inference-time hallucination decomposition. We further highlight the necessity of CoT-level hallucination mitigation by analyzing the conditional dependency between CoT and answer hallucinations. 

2.1 Answer Bias in Response-level DPO Observation. We analyze the training dynamics of OPA-DPO (Yang et al., 2025b) by decompos-ing each response into CoT and answer spans and tracking their loss ratios during training. As shown in Figure 2 (a), the policy-reference preference gap grows faster on the answer segment than on CoT, indicating that answer-level signals are optimized more rapidly during response-level DPO. To further examine this bias, we implement an answer-only variant, (cw, a w) ≻ (cw, a l), where the same CoT is shared and only the final answer differs. This removes CoT-level preference from the comparison and provides only answer-level su-pervision. As shown in Figure 2 (b), its CHAIR S

score is close to that of OPA-DPO. 2(a) (b) (c) Figure 2: Motivating observations for RC-DPO. (a) Loss-ratio curves of CoT and answer segments during OPA-DPO training. (b) Segment-level CHAIR S scores of the original model, OPA-DPO, and the answer-only variant OPA-DPO Ans . (c) Conditional distribution between CoT CHAIR i scores and answer CHAIR i scores. 

Insights. These results suggest that response-level DPO may be biased toward answer-level optimization, with much of its gain arising from answer-level preference learning, while CoT pref-erence remains insufficiently captured. This moti-vates a more fine-grained objective that explicitly separates CoT alignment from answer-level align-ment to reduce reliance on shortcut learning. 

2.2 CoT as the Hallucination Bottleneck Observation. We evaluate CHAIR S on OPA-DPO outputs, including the complete response and its decomposed CoT and answer segments. As shown in Figure 2 (b), although OPA-DPO reduces hallu-cinations compared with the original model, CoT hallucination remains consistently higher than an-swer hallucination, with the full-response score staying closer to the CoT score. 

Insights. This indicates that residual full-response hallucinations are largely dominated by hallucinated reasoning chains, making CoT the key bottleneck. Therefore, improving the final answer alone is insufficient, and effective hallucination mitigation requires explicit CoT-level alignment. 

2.3 CoT-Conditioned Answer Hallucination Observation. We further analyze the condi-tional probability of answer hallucination given CoT hallucination based on segment-level CHAIR i

scores. As shown in Figure 2 (c), answers remain hallucination-free when no hallucinated content appears in the CoT, as indicated by the first col-umn. In contrast, answer hallucinations become more frequent once hallucinations appear in the CoT, revealing a conditional dependency between CoT hallucination and answer hallucination. 

Insights. This conditional dependence suggests that answer hallucination is closely associated with hallucinations in the reasoning chain. Unsupported visual claims introduced during reasoning may propagate to the final answer, making answer-level correction alone insufficient. Therefore, effective hallucination mitigation should explicitly align rea-soning chains, ensuring that CoTs provide reliable support for the preferred answer. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Before delving into the proposed reasoning-conditioned algorithm, i.e. , RC-DPO, we first re-visit the generation paradigm of MLRMs and the formulation of standard DPO, which provide the foundation for our subsequent derivations. 

Multimodal Reasoning with CoT. Given a mul-timodal input x = ( v, q ), where v denotes the im-age and q denotes the user prompt, an MLRM πθ

generates a response y consisting of an intermedi-ate reasoning chain c and a final answer a. Under the standard autoregressive formulation, the likeli-hood of the response can be factorized as 

πθ(y|x) = πθ(c, a |x) = πθ(c|x)πθ(a|x, c ). (1) This decomposition shows that response generation involves two related but distinct components, i.e. ,generating the reasoning chain and producing the final answer conditioned on that chain. 

Response-level DPO. Standard DPO optimizes a policy model with preference pairs. Given an input 

x, a preferred response yw, and a rejected response 3Q: Which       

> teddy bear
> is for girls?
> <think>
> ### Step 1: The image shows
> two teddy bears in plastic ...
> ### Step 2: ...
> <END>
> ### Step 3: ...
> <END>
> <END></think> <answer>
> The teddy bear on the left is
> dressed in ..., making it more
> likely to be for girls.
> </answer>

CoT Format Alignment 

> Structured CoT
> Generation

Positive Sample Construction  

> ...
> MCTS Sampling
> Path 1
> (Score 0.42)
> Path 2
> (Score 0.65)
> Path N
> (Score 0.78)
> ...
> Select Expand
> Simulate
> Back-
> propagate

Negative Sample Construction      

> Positive
> CoT+Answer
> CoT-to-image
> Attention
> Negative
> CoT+Answer
> Image Query CoT
> Image  Query  CoT
>       ...
> Visual-relevant
> Tokens Pruning
>     

Preference Optimization  

> Policy Reference

 (   ,     ,  )

> >

 (   ,     ,  )

 (   ,  ,  ,   )

> >

 (   ,  ,  ,   )Figure 3: Overview of RC-DPO. We first construct SFT data to align the CoT format. Then, we construct positive and negative reasoning samples through MCTS sampling and attention-guided token pruning, respectively. Finally, we optimize the policy model with both response-level and reasoning-conditioned preference objectives. 

yl, the DPO objective is formulated as 

LDPO = − log σ



β



log πθ (yw |x)

πref (yw |x) − log πθ (yl|x)

πref (yl|x)

 

,

(2) 

where πref indicates a fixed reference model and β

controls the strength of regularization. For MLRMs, existing methods typically con-struct preference pairs over complete responses, 

i.e. , yw = ( cw, a w) and yl = ( cl, a l). Therefore, the response-level DPO can be formulated as 

LDPO = − log σ β

"

log πθ(cw, a w|x)

πref (cw, a w|x)

− log πθ(cl, a l|x)

πref (cl, a l|x)

#! 

.

(3) As revealed in Section 2, such response-level pref-erence signals remain coarse-grained, as they do not explicitly distinguish CoT-level alignment from answer-level alignment, leading to answer short-cuts and insufficient CoT optimization. 

3.2 The Proposed RC-DPO 

Motivated by the above analysis, we propose RC-DPO to explicitly align reasoning chains by model-ing the CoT as a condition for answer generation. The overall pipeline is illustrated in Figure 3. 

CoT Format Alignment. We first perform super-vised fine-tuning (SFT) to align the model with a structured CoT format. This stage not only serves as a warm-up phase for subsequent DPO training, but also adapts the model to generate well-structured reasoning trajectories suitable for MCTS-based positive sample construction. Specif-ically, given an input x = ( v, q ) ∈ D , we prompt the model with few-shot demonstrations, as illus-trated in Appendix F, to generate a step-wise CoT c

followed by a final answer a. The resulting triples form the SFT dataset DSF T , on which the model is trained with the standard supervised objective: 

LSFT = −E(x,c,a )∼D SFT [log πθ(c, a |x)] . (4) After this warm-up stage, the model πSFT can pro-duce structured CoT trajectories, enabling subse-quent MCTS to operate over explicit reasoning paths rather than unstructured free-form responses. 

Reasoning-conditioned Preference Optimiza-tion. As revealed in Section 2, response-level DPO behaves similarly to answer-only optimiza-tion, suggesting that reasoning chains may be under-emphasized when the CoT and final answer are jointly optimized as a complete response. To ad-dress this issue, we first formulate a CoT-oriented preference term that keeps the preferred answer fixed and compares different reasoning chains un-der the same multimodal input: 

(cw, a w)|x ≻ (cl, a w)|x, (5) where x = ( v, q ), cw denotes a visually grounded and logically valid CoT, and cl denotes a halluci-nated or corrupted CoT. 4By the chain rule, the likelihood ratio of this preference can be decomposed as 

log πθ(cw, a w|x)

πθ(cl, a w|x) = log πθ(cw|x)

πθ(cl|x)+ log πθ(aw|x, c w)

πθ(aw|x, c l) .

(6) The first term compares the likelihood of gener-ating a high-quality CoT against a corrupted one, while the second term quantifies the conditional support that each CoT provides for generating the same preferred answer. Notably, the first term is es-sentially covered by standard response-level DPO over complete responses, whose likelihood ratio can be decomposed as 

log πθ(cw, a w|x)

πθ(cl, a l|x) = log πθ(cw|x)

πθ(cl|x)+ log πθ(aw|x, c w)

πθ(al|x, c l) .

(7) Hence, RC-DPO retains response-level DPO for general response preference learning and adds a reasoning-conditioned objective to explicitly opti-mize the answer-support term. Following the DPO formulation, we define the reasoning-conditioned preference objective as 

LRC = − log σ β

"

log πθ(aw|x, c w)

πref (aw|x, c w)

− log πθ(aw|x, c l)

πref (aw|x, c l)

#! 

,

(8) where πref denotes the fixed reference model, in-stantiated as the SFT-warmed model πSFT . By keeping the target answer fixed and varying only the CoT condition, this objective isolates the ef-fect of the reasoning chain on answer generation. With the reference model as a baseline, the margin measures how much the policy model improves the conditional support for aw under different CoT conditions. Maximizing this margin encourages the model to assign higher preference to the answer under a high-quality CoT than under a corrupted one, thereby providing a direct training signal for answer-supportive CoT alignment. 

Training Objective. The final RC-DPO ob-jective combines response-level and reasoning-conditioned preference learning: 

L = LDPO + λLRC , (9) where λ controls the trade-off between the two ob-jectives. The response-level objective maintains the general preference alignment over complete re-sponses, while the reasoning-conditioned objective provides explicit supervision for CoT-level align-ment by contrasting the conditional support for the preferred answer. This joint optimization enables RC-DPO to mitigate hallucinations in both inter-mediate reasoning chains and final answers. 

3.3 Preference Data Construction 

To support the above objective, RC-DPO re-quires reasoning-conditioned preference samples 

(x, c w, a w, c l, a l). Unlike previous methods that rely on ground-truth annotations or response cor-rection from stronger external models such as GPT (Yang et al., 2025b), we introduce a preference data generation pipeline based on the model’s own out-puts. Below, we detail the construction of positive and negative reasoning samples, respectively. 

Positive Sample Construction. For each multi-modal input x = ( v, q ), we use the SFT-warmed model πSFT to perform reasoning search with Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Starting from the root node, MCTS incrementally expands candi-date reasoning steps and performs rollouts to com-plete CoT-answer trajectories. During the search, a verifier is employed to evaluate candidate trajec-tories based on visual consistency, logical validity, and answer correctness. The resulting scores are back-propagated along the search tree to guide sub-sequent exploration. After the search, we select the highest-scoring trajectory as the positive sample: 

(cw, a w) = arg max   

> (c,a )∈T (x)

S(c, a ; x), (10) where T (x) denotes the set of candidate trajecto-ries explored during the search, and S(·) repre-sents the verifier score. By selecting the highest-scoring trajectory, this process promotes positive CoTs with stronger visual grounding and logical consistency. Additional details of the search algo-rithm are provided in Appendix C. 

Negative Sample Construction. To construct challenging negative CoTs, we introduce an image-attention-based CoT corruption strategy. Given a response (c, a ) obtained by standard sampling from 

πSFT , we compute the attention from each CoT to-ken to image tokens. Specifically, for each CoT 5Table 1: Performance comparison of RC-DPO with baseline methods on the Object HalBench. CS and CI denote CHAIR S and CHAIR I respectively, where lower values indicate fewer hallucinations. 

Method R1-Onevision MM-Eureka ThinkLite-VL OpenVLThinker 

CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓

Vanilla 36.7 7.6 34.0 7.5 30.7 7.5 31.7 7.3 VCD 42.3 9.4 28.7 8.2 35.0 8.2 27.0 8.1 SID 43.7 9.2 35.3 8.3 34.7 8.4 35.7 8.9 RLAIF-V 38.0 7.9 33.3 7.3 33.0 7.8 27.3 6.8 OPA-DPO 40.0 8.6 29.0 5.4 30.3 7.6 27.0 7.1 RC-DPO 21.7 6.2 21.3 5.4 18.7 4.9 24.3 6.4 

token ct, its image-attention score is computed as 

s(ct) = 1

|L||H| 

X

> l∈L

X

> h∈H

X

> k∈I

A(l,h ) 

> t,k

, (11) where L and H denote the sets of selected attention layers and heads, respectively. I denotes image-token positions, and A(l,h ) 

> t,k

represents the attention weight from CoT token ct to image token vk.Intuitively, a higher image-attention score indi-cates that the token carries more visual information. We rank CoT tokens according to their scores s and remove the top-ranked visually salient tokens: 

cl = Prune( c; s, r ), (12) where r denotes the pruning ratio. Since the pruned tokens are highly associated with visual evidence, the resulting CoT cl disrupts the visual grounding of the reasoning chain, thereby serving as a chal-lenging negative reasoning condition for RC-DPO. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Models and Datasets. We evaluate RC-DPO on four representative MLRMs: R1-Onevision-7B (Yang et al., 2025a), MM-Eureka-7B (Meng et al., 2025), ThinkLite-VL-7B (Wang et al., 2026), and OpenVLThinker-7B (Deng et al., 2026). For training data construction, we adopt the RLAIF-V dataset (Yu et al., 2025), using 10K samples for SFT and 5K samples for DPO. 

Evaluation Metrics. We comprehensively eval-uate the performance across a wide range of benchmarks. For hallucination evaluation, we adopt Object HalBench (Rohrbach et al., 2018), POPE (Li et al., 2023), MMHal-Bench (Sun et al., 2024), GPT-4 assisted evaluation (Zhao et al., 2023), and AMBER (Wang et al., 2023), cov-ering object hallucination, response faithfulness, and hallucination-oriented multimodal reliability. For general-purpose evaluation, we use MME (Fu et al., 2026), MMBench (Liu et al., 2024c), VM-CBench (Zhang et al., 2025), and MMVP (Tong et al., 2024) to assess multimodal perception, rea-soning, and visual-language understanding abilities. Detailed descriptions of these evaluation bench-marks are provided in Appendix D.2. 

Baseline algorithms. We compare RC-DPO with both decoding-based and training-based meth-ods. For decoding-based baselines, we adopt VCD (Leng et al., 2024) and SID (Huo et al., 2025), which adjust token probability distributions through contrastive decoding. For training-based baselines, we adapt two state-of-the-art MLLM alignment methods, namely RLAIF-V (Yu et al., 2025) and OPA-DPO (Yang et al., 2025b). 

Implementation Details. In the warm-up stage, we perform SFT with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), using a rank of 8 and training for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 5e−5. For positive sample construction, we employ MCTS with a maximum of 3 children per node and 30 search iterations to discover high-quality responses. For negative sam-ple construction, we use all attention layers and heads to compute image-attention scores, and set the pruning ratio r to 20%. In the preference learn-ing stage, we train the model for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 1e−6 and a batch size of 32. The KL penalty coefficient is set to β = 0 .1, and the reasoning-conditioned loss weight is set to λ = 0 .1.More details are provided in Appendix D.3. 

4.2 Performance Evaluation 

Due to space limitations, we report the results on Object HalBench, POPE, and GPT-4 assisted eval-6Table 2: Comparison of RC-DPO with baseline methods on the POPE benchmark. 

Model Method Random Popular Adversarial 

Accuracy F1 Score Accuracy F1 Score Accuracy F1 Score MM-Eureka 

Vanilla 86.43% 84.55% 85.30% 83.48% 85.03% 83.23% VCD 87.73% 86.15% 86.43% 84.91% 85.67% 84.21% SID 87.50% 85.88% 85.93% 84.35% 85.40% 83.85% RLAIF-V 86.30% 84.28% 84.87% 82.92% 84.50% 82.57% OPA-DPO 87.33% 85.63% 86.13% 84.49% 85.30% 83.71% RC-DPO 89.17% 87.95% 86.80% 85.69% 86.07% 85.02% 

R1-Onevision 

Vanilla 76.83% 76.46% 75.93% 75.76% 76.47% 76.16% VCD 76.57% 76.90% 76.27% 76.38% 76.80% 76.97% SID 76.77% 76.82% 77.63% 77.63% 77.03% 77.24% RLAIF-V 79.73% 78.86% 79.07% 78.36% 78.60% 77.98% OPA-DPO 85.53% 83.58% 83.60% 81.83% 83.20% 81.47% RC-DPO 87.27% 85.56% 85.50% 83.88% 84.80% 83.24% Vanilla VCD RLAIF-V OPA-DPO RC-DPO 

> Figure 4: Radar chart of the GPT-4 assisted evaluation results. We report the Sentence-level Hallucination Ratio (SHR), Word-level Hallucination Ratio (WHR), 1&2-gram scores, and Words Per Image (WPI). A larger radar area indicates better overall performance.

uation in this section. More comprehensive results are provided in Appendix E. 

Object HalBench Evaluation. Following previ-ous works (Yu et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b), we prompt MLRMs to generate captions for 300 images from the MSCOCO validation set (Lin et al., 2014) and compute CHAIR metrics based on the generated outputs and object annotations. As shown in Table 1, RC-DPO consistently achieves the lowest CHAIR S and CHAIR I scores across all evaluated MLRMs, demonstrating its effectiveness in reducing object-level hallucinations. Specifi-cally, compared with the vanilla models, RC-DPO substantially reduces CHAIR S from 36.7 to 21.7 on R1-Onevision and from 34.0 to 21.3 on MM-Eureka. In contrast, decoding-based methods ex-hibit unstable performance and even increase hal-lucination in several cases, while training-based baselines yield limited and inconsistent improve-ments. These results indicate that RC-DPO more effectively mitigates object hallucinations in ML-RMs by explicitly aligning reasoning chains. 

POPE Evaluation. The POPE benchmark evalu-ates object hallucinations with prompts in the for-mat “ Is there a <object> in the image? ”. The resulting yes/no responses are compared with ground-truth labels to compute accuracy, preci-sion, recall, and F1 score. Due to space limita-tions, Table 2 reports results on MM-Eureka and R1-Onevision, while results on the other two mod-els are provided in Appendix E.1. RC-DPO con-sistently achieves the best performance across all settings on both MM-Eureka and R1-Onevision. Compared with the strongest training-based base-line OPA-DPO, RC-DPO improves the F1 score by 2.32%, 1.20%, and 1.31% on MM-Eureka un-7(a) (b) (c) Figure 5: Ablation studies of RC-DPO. (a) Effects of different components on CHAIR S . (b) Sensitivity analysis of the reasoning-conditioned loss weight λ. (c) Sensitivity analysis of the pruning rate for negative CoT construction. 

der the three settings, respectively. These results demonstrate that RC-DPO effectively improves ob-ject existence recognition and reduces hallucinated responses across diverse evaluation settings. 

GPT-4 Assisted Evaluation. While POPE and CHAIR are reliable metrics widely adopted in pre-vious studies, they mainly focus on object hal-lucination and may overlook other hallucination types. For a more comprehensive evaluation, we employ the GPT-4 assisted evaluation benchmark to assess both hallucination and descriptive quality in open-ended image captioning. Specifically, we report Sentence-level Hallucination Ratio (SHR), Word-level Hallucination Ratio (WHR), 1&2-gram scores, and Words Per Image (WPI) in Figure 4. RC-DPO achieves consistently strong performance across four MLRMs. Compared with vanilla mod-els and baseline methods, RC-DPO generally cov-ers a larger radar area, indicating better overall per-formance. The improvements on SHR and WHR demonstrate its effectiveness in reducing halluci-nated descriptions, while the high 1&2-gram scores indicate that RC-DPO generates adequate and flu-ent responses. These results further verify that reasoning-chain alignment improves response faith-fulness without sacrificing descriptive quality. 

4.3 Ablation Study Module ablation. We evaluate the contribution of each component in RC-DPO. As shown in Fig-ure 5 (a), removing the reasoning-conditioned loss 

LRC , MCTS-based sampling, or attention-guided pruning consistently increases CHAIR S . Among them, removing LRC causes the most significant performance drop, highlighting the importance of explicitly optimizing answer-supportive CoT align-ment. The full RC-DPO achieves the best per-formance, demonstrating that positive reasoning search and negative CoT corruption provide com-plementary benefits for hallucination mitigation. 

Hyperparameter ablation. We further study the sensitivity of RC-DPO to the loss weight λ and pruning rate r. As shown in Figure 5 (b), increas-ing λ initially improves performance, with the best result achieved at λ = 0 .1. However, larger val-ues lead to performance degradation, suggesting that excessive RC supervision may hinder general preference learning. Figure 5 (c) shows that a prun-ing rate of 20% achieves the lowest CHAIR S . A smaller pruning rate may produce weak negative CoTs, while a larger rate may overly disrupt the reasoning structure. Therefore, we set λ = 0 .1 and 

r = 20% in our main experiments. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we investigate hallucination mitiga-tion in MLRMs from the perspective of reasoning-chain alignment. Motivated by our observation that response-level DPO primarily captures answer-level preference while leaving reasoning chains insufficiently optimized, we propose RC-DPO, a reasoning-conditioned preference optimization framework that explicitly treats the CoT as a con-dition for answer generation and aligns reasoning chains by comparing their support for the preferred answer. To enable this objective, we further intro-duce a preference data construction pipeline that combines MCTS-based positive reasoning search with image-attention-guided CoT corruption for negative sample construction. Extensive experi-ments across multiple MLRMs and benchmarks demonstrate that RC-DPO effectively reduces hal-lucinations while improving general multimodal reasoning ability. These results highlight the im-portance of explicitly aligning reasoning chains for building more faithful and reliable MLRMs. 8Ethical Statement 

This work aims to improve the faithfulness and reli-ability of Multimodal Large Reasoning Models by mitigating hallucinations in both reasoning chains and final answers. We conduct experiments on pub-licly available datasets and benchmarks, and do not collect or annotate any private user data. We adhere to strict ethical standards throughout our study. All code, models, and datasets used in this study are employed in accordance with their intended use and corresponding licenses. Since our method is designed to reduce hallucinated content rather than generate harmful or sensitive outputs, we do not intentionally introduce unsafe data or malicious in-structions during training. We also report results across diverse benchmarks to avoid over-claiming effectiveness on a single evaluation setting. 

Limitation 

Although RC-DPO demonstrates strong effective-ness in mitigating hallucinations in MLRMs, there remain several directions for future improvement. • Our work makes an initial step toward reasoning-chain alignment for hallucination mitigation in MLRMs at the trajectory level, where each CoT is treated as a complete rea-soning condition for answer generation. Fu-ture work could explore more fine-grained reasoning-chain alignment, such as step-level preference modeling or token-level process supervision, to better understand which inter-mediate reasoning steps contribute most to faithful answer generation. • Our current negative sample construction fo-cuses on corrupting CoTs by pruning visually salient tokens based on image attention. Fu-ture work could further enrich the preference signal by incorporating more diverse reason-ing conditions, such as subtle logical inconsis-tencies, commonsense conflicts, or multi-step reasoning failures, enabling more comprehen-sive reasoning-chain alignment. 

References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Zechen Bai, Pichao Wang, Tianjun Xiao, Tong He, Zongbo Han, Zheng Zhang, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2024. Hallucination of multimodal large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18930 .Hyeong Soo Chang, Michael C Fu, Jiaqiao Hu, and Steven I Marcus. 2005. An adaptive sampling algo-rithm for solving markov decision processes. Opera-tions research , 53(1):126–139. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, and 1 others. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 .Yihe Deng, Hritik Bansal, Fan Yin, Nanyun Peng, Wei Wang, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2026. Openvlthinker: Complex vision-language reasoning via iterative sft-rl cycles. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 38:123817–123846. Bowen Dong, Minheng Ni, Zitong Huang, Guanglei Yang, Wangmeng Zuo, and Lei Zhang. 2026. Mi-rage: Assessing hallucination in multimodal reason-ing chains of mllm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:122910–122955. Hao Fang, Jinyu Li, Jiawei Kong, Tianqu Zhuang, Kuofeng Gao, Bin Chen, Shu-Tao Xia, and Yaowei Wang. 2026a. Seeing through the chain: Mitigate hallucination in multimodal reasoning models via cot compression and contrastive preference optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03380 .Hao Fang, Changle Zhou, Jiawei Kong, Kuofeng Gao, Bin Chen, Tao Liang, Guojun Ma, and Shu-Tao Xia. 2026b. Grounding language with vision: A condi-tional mutual information calibrated decoding strat-egy for reducing hallucinations in lvlms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:105233– 105258. Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, and 1 others. 2026. Mme: Acomprehensive evaluation benchmark for multimodal large language models. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 38. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .

9Fushuo Huo, Wenchao Xu, Zhong Zhang, Haozhao Wang, Zhicheng Chen, and Peilin Zhao. 2025. Self-introspective decoding: Alleviating hallucinations for large vision-language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 24272–24295. Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, and 1 others. 2017. Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image anno-tations. International journal of computer vision ,123(1):32–73. Sicong Leng, Jing Wang, Jiaxi Li, Hao Zhang, Zhiqiang Hu, Boqiang Zhang, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Lidong Bing, and 1 others. 2025. Mmr1: Enhancing multimodal reasoning with variance-aware sampling and open resources. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21268 .Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Guanzheng Chen, Xin Li, Shijian Lu, Chunyan Miao, and Lidong Bing. 2024. Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-language models through visual contrastive decod-ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13872–13882. Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Evaluating object hallucination in large vision-language models. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 292– 305. Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European confer-ence on computer vision , pages 740–755. Springer. Fuxiao Liu, Kevin Lin, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Yaser Yacoob, and Lijuan Wang. 2024a. Mitigating halluci-nation in large multi-modal models via robust instruc-tion tuning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 57689–57733. Hanchao Liu, Wenyuan Xue, Yifei Chen, Dapeng Chen, Xiutian Zhao, Ke Wang, Liping Hou, Rongjun Li, and Wei Peng. 2024b. A survey on hallucination in large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00253 .Sheng Liu, Haotian Ye, and James Y Zou. 2025. Reduc-ing hallucinations in large vision-language models via latent space steering. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 72402–72419. Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan, Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, and 1 others. 2024c. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around player? In European conference on computer vision ,pages 216–233. Springer. Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , vol-ume 2024, pages 23439–23554. Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tanglin Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for science question answering. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:2507–2521. Yan Ma, Linge Du, Xuyang Shen, Shaoxiang Chen, Pengfei Li, Qibing Ren, Lizhuang Ma, Yuchao Dai, Pengfei Liu, and Junjie Yan. 2025. One rl to see them all: Visual triple unified reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18129 .Ahmed Masry, Xuan Long Do, Jia Qing Tan, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. 2022. Chartqa: A benchmark for question answering about charts with visual and logical reasoning. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2263– 2279. Fanqing Meng, Lingxiao Du, Zongkai Liu, Zhixiang Zhou, Quanfeng Lu, Daocheng Fu, Tiancheng Han, Botian Shi, Wenhai Wang, Junjun He, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Mm-eureka: Exploring the frontiers of multimodal reasoning with rule-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07365 .Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2018. Object hallu-cination in image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4035–4045. Zhiqing Sun, Sheng Shen, Shengcao Cao, Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yikang Shen, Chuang Gan, Liangyan Gui, Yu-Xiong Wang, Yiming Yang, and 1 others. 2024. Aligning large multimodal models with factu-ally augmented rlhf. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13088–13110. Shengbang Tong, Zhuang Liu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, Yann LeCun, and Saining Xie. 2024. Eyes wide shut? exploring the visual shortcomings of multi-modal llms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 9568–9578. Tom Vodopivec, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Branko Ster. 2017. On monte carlo tree search and rein-forcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 60:881–936. Junyang Wang, Yuhang Wang, Guohai Xu, Jing Zhang, Yukai Gu, Haitao Jia, Jiaqi Wang, Haiyang Xu, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, and 1 others. 2023. Amber: An llm-free multi-dimensional benchmark for mllms halluci-nation evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07397 .

10 Xintong Wang, Jingheng Pan, Liang Ding, and Chris Biemann. 2024. Mitigating hallucinations in large vision-language models with instruction contrastive decoding. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 15840–15853. Xiyao Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Chao Feng, Hongjin Lu, Linjie Li, Chung-Ching Lin, Kevin Lin, Furong Huang, and Lijuan Wang. 2026. Sota with less: Mcts-guided sample selection for data-efficient visual rea-soning self-improvement. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 38:118818–118850. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 .Zhongxing Xu, Chengzhi Liu, Qingyue Wei, Juncheng Wu, James Zou, Xin Wang, Yuyin Zhou, and Sheng Liu. 2026. More thinking, less seeing? assessing am-plified hallucination in multimodal reasoning models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,38:82878–82905. Xiaochen Yang, Hao Fang, Jiawei Kong, Yaoxin Mao, Bin Chen, and Shu-Tao Xia. 2026. Looking back and forth: Cross-image attention calibration and atten-tive preference learning for multi-image hallucination mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07048 .Yi Yang, Xiaoxuan He, Hongkun Pan, Xiyan Jiang, Yan Deng, Xingtao Yang, Haoyu Lu, Dacheng Yin, Fengyun Rao, Minfeng Zhu, and 1 others. 2025a. R1-onevision: Advancing generalized multimodal reasoning through cross-modal formalization. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 2376–2385. Zhihe Yang, Xufang Luo, Dongqi Han, Yunjian Xu, and Dongsheng Li. 2025b. Mitigating hallucinations in large vision-language models via dpo: On-policy data hold the key. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition , pages 10610–10620. Tianyu Yu, Yuan Yao, Haoye Zhang, Taiwen He, Yifeng Han, Ganqu Cui, Jinyi Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Hai-Tao Zheng, Maosong Sun, and 1 others. 2024. Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment from fine-grained correctional human feedback. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13807– 13816. Tianyu Yu, Haoye Zhang, Qiming Li, Qixin Xu, Yuan Yao, Da Chen, Xiaoman Lu, Ganqu Cui, Yunkai Dang, Taiwen He, and 1 others. 2025. Rlaif-v: Open-source ai feedback leads to super gpt-4v trustworthi-ness. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition Conference , pages 19985–19995. Yufei Zhan, Yousong Zhu, Shurong Zheng, Hongyin Zhao, Fan Yang, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. 2025. Vision-r1: Evolving human-free alignment in large vision-language models via vision-guided reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18013 .Yuhui Zhang, Yuchang Su, Yiming Liu, Xiaohan Wang, James Burgess, Elaine Sui, Chenyu Wang, Josiah Aklilu, Alejandro Lozano, Anjiang Wei, and 1 others. 2025. Automated generation of challenging multiple-choice questions for vision language model evalua-tion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition Conference , pages 29580–29590. Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Hai Zhao, George Karypis, and Alex Smola. 2023. Multi-modal chain-of-thought reasoning in language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00923 .Zhiyuan Zhao, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, Xiaoyi Dong, Jiaqi Wang, and Conghui He. 2023. Beyond hallu-cinations: Enhancing lvlms through hallucination-aware direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16839 .Xianwei Zhuang, Zhihong Zhu, Yuxin Xie, Liming Liang, and Yuexian Zou. 2025. Vasparse: Towards efficient visual hallucination mitigation via visual-aware token sparsification. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Confer-ence , pages 4189–4199. 

11 A Pseudocode 

The pseudocode of our RC-DPO is provided in Alg. 1, with the definitions of the associated loss functions detailed in the main text. 

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of RC-DPO 

Require: π0: the base MLRM; D: the image-question dataset; S(·): the verifier model; r:the pruning ratio; Nsft : the number of SFT it-erations; Ndpo : the number of DPO iterations; 

Ensure: optimized policy model πθ; 

> 1:

Initialize πθ ← π0, DSFT ← ∅ , Dpref ← ∅ ; 

> 2:

// CoT Format Alignment  

> 3:

for each input x = ( v, q ) ∈ D do  

> 4:

Prompt πθ to generate step-wise c and a; 

> 5:

Add (x, c, a ) to DSFT ; 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

for i ← 1 to Nsft do  

> 8:

Update πθ on DSFT using LSFT in Eq. 4;  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Set the SFT-warmed model πSFT ← πθ; 

> 11:

// Preference Data Construction  

> 12:

for each input x = ( v, q ) ∈ D do  

> 13:

Conduct MCTS with πSFT and S(·); 

> 14:

Select (cw, a w) using Eq. 10;  

> 15:

Sample (c, a ) ∼ πSFT (·| x); 

> 16:

Compute s(ct) for each CoT token ct; 

> 17:

cl ← Prune( c; s, r ) by Eq. 12;  

> 18:

Add (x, c w, a w, c l, a ) to Dpref ; 

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

// RC-DPO Training  

> 21:

Initialize reference model πref ← πSFT ; 

> 22:

for i ← 1 to Ndpo do  

> 23:

Sample a mini-batch from Dpref ; 

> 24:

Compute response-level loss LDPO ; 

> 25:

Compute reasoning-conditioned loss LRC ; 

> 26:

Update πθ using L = LDPO + λLRC ; 

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

return optimized policy model πθ;

B Related Work 

B.1 Multimodal Large Reasoning Models 

Large Reasoning Models have recently shown strong capabilities on complex tasks by explicitly generating intermediate inference steps before pro-ducing final responses (Wang et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2025). Inspired by their success, recent stud-ies have extended this reasoning-oriented paradigm to vision-language scenarios, giving rise to Mul-timodal Large Reasoning Models (Leng et al., 2025; Zhan et al., 2025). Early multimodal rea-soning works construct step-by-step rationales for visual question answering and science reasoning (Lu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), while more advanced MLRMs enhance long-chain visual rea-soning through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Yang et al., 2025a) and reinforcement learning (RL) (Ma et al., 2025). Various techniques, including data construction (Meng et al., 2025), sample selection (Wang et al., 2026), and self-improvement (Deng et al., 2026) have also been explored to further elicit and strengthen multimodal reasoning abilities. 

B.2 Multimodal Hallucination 

Extensive studies have demonstrated that multi-modal models are prone to hallucination, i.e. , gen-erating fluent and plausible responses that are in-consistent with the visual content (Liu et al., 2024b; Bai et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2026). Existing hal-lucination mitigation methods for MLLMs can be broadly categorized into training-based and training-free approaches. Training-based methods mainly improve cross-modal alignment through high-quality instruction data or advanced alignment algorithms (Liu et al., 2024a; Yu et al., 2024). In contrast, training-free methods intervene during in-ference stage, including contrastive decoding (Leng et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024), token pruning (Huo et al., 2025; Zhuang et al., 2025), latent steer-ing (Liu et al., 2025), and mutual-information-based calibration (Fang et al., 2026b). In MLRMs, hallucination becomes more sub-tle and challenging, since extended reasoning may amplify reliance on language priors and reduce at-tention to visual evidence (Xu et al., 2026; Fang et al., 2026a). Recent work has investigated the relationship between reasoning ability and hallu-cination severity (Xu et al., 2026), while another line analyzes hallucinations within multimodal rea-soning chains and introduces benchmarks tailored to reasoning hallucination evaluation (Dong et al., 2026). To mitigate hallucinations in MLRMs, re-cent studies have explored post-alignment with curated comparison pairs, including AI-feedback-based alignment (Yu et al., 2025), on-policy opti-mization (Yang et al., 2025b), and CoT compres-sion (Fang et al., 2026a). However, these methods typically rely on coarse-grained supervision, leav-ing reasoning chains insufficiently optimized. 12 C MCTS for Positive Data Construction 

To construct high-quality positive reasoning sam-ples, we employ Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) over structured CoT trajectories. For each multi-modal input x = ( v, q ), the SFT-warmed model 

πSFT serves as the policy model for expanding reasoning paths, while a verifier S(·) evaluates the quality of completed CoT-answer trajectories. Each node in the search tree corresponds to a partial rea-soning trajectory, and each edge represents a newly generated reasoning step. The goal of MCTS is to explore diverse reasoning paths and identify a trajectory that is visually grounded, logically con-sistent, and leads to a correct final answer. Specifi-cally, MCTS iteratively performs four steps: selec-tion, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation. 

C.1 Selection 

Starting from the root node corresponding to the input x = ( v, q ), MCTS selects a promising path from the current search tree. Following the stan-dard MCTS procedure (Vodopivec et al., 2017), we use UCB1 algorithm (Chang et al., 2005) to select the child node s′ at each intermediate node s:

s∗ = arg max 

> s′∈Child( s)

"

Q(s′) + α

s

log N (s)

N (s′) + ϵ

#

,

(13) where Q(s′) denotes the estimated value of child node s′, N (s) and N (s′) are the visit counts of the parent and child nodes, respectively, α controls the exploration strength, and ϵ is a small constant for numerical stability. The first term encourages ex-ploitation of high-value reasoning paths, while the second term promotes exploration of less-visited nodes, thereby balancing trajectory quality and diversity. This selection process continues until reaching a leaf node that has not been expanded. 

C.2 Expansion. 

After the selection stage reaches an expandable leaf node s, MCTS expands the search tree by generat-ing new child nodes from s. In our setting, each node represents a partial reasoning trajectory, and each child node corresponds to extending the cur-rent trajectory with a newly generated reasoning step. Specifically, we use the SFT-warmed model 

πSFT to sample candidate next steps conditioned on the input x and the current partial CoT c1: t:

ct+1 ∼ πSFT (·| x, c 1: t). (14) Each sampled step is appended to the current tra-jectory to form a new child node. To control the search cost, we restrict the maximum number of children for each node. In this way, MCTS ex-plores multiple possible reasoning directions while maintaining a manageable search space. 

C.3 Simulation. 

For each newly expanded node, MCTS performs a rollout to estimate the quality of the corresponding reasoning path. Starting from the partial trajectory 

c1: t+1 , we use πSFT to complete the remaining reasoning process and generate a full CoT-answer trajectory (c, a ). The completed trajectory is then evaluated by the verifier S(·):

R = S(c, a ; x), (15) where R denotes the reward assigned to the rollout trajectory. The verifier considers the visual consis-tency of the CoT with the input image, the logical coherence of the reasoning process, and the correct-ness of the final answer. Therefore, trajectories that are visually grounded, logically valid, and answer-correct receive higher rewards, which are later used to guide the tree search. 

C.4 Backpropagation. 

After obtaining the verifier reward R, MCTS back-propagates it along the selected path from the ex-panded node to the root. For each visited node s,we update its visit count and value estimate: 

N (s) ← N (s) + 1 , (16) 

Q(s) ← Q(s) + R − Q(s)

N (s) . (17) Here, N (s) records how many times node s has been visited, and Q(s) denotes the average reward of trajectories passing through s. This update al-lows high-quality reasoning paths to receive larger value estimates, making them more likely to be selected in subsequent iterations. By repeatedly performing selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation, MCTS gradually concentrates the search on promising reasoning trajectories. After the search terminates, we select the trajectory with the highest verifier score as the positive CoT-answer sample: 

(cw, a w) = arg max   

> (c,a )∈T (x)

S(c, a ; x),

where T (x) denotes the set of completed trajecto-ries explored during MCTS. The selected trajectory 13 is then used as the positive CoT-answer pair for sub-sequent preference optimization. 

D Experimental Details 

D.1 Evaluated Models 

As mentioned in the main text, we adopt R1-Onevision-7B (Yang et al., 2025a), MM-Eureka-7B (Meng et al., 2025), ThinkLite-VL-7B (Wang et al., 2026), and OpenVLThinker-7B (Deng et al., 2026). These models are selected because they fol-low the reason-before-answer paradigm and gen-erate explicit CoT-style reasoning before final an-swers, making them suitable for evaluating CoT-level hallucination mitigation. Specifically, R1-Onevision is designed for general multimodal rea-soning, while MM-Eureka and ThinkLite-VL fo-cus on long-chain visual reasoning and multimodal problem solving. OpenVLThinker further enhances complex vision-language reasoning through itera-tive training. Their diverse training recipes and reasoning behaviors allow us to assess the general-izability of RC-DPO across different MLRMs. 

D.2 Evaluation Benchmarks Object HalBench. Caption Hallucina-tion Assessment with Image Relevance (CHAIR) (Rohrbach et al., 2018) is a widely used metric for evaluating object hallucination in image captioning. It measures whether generated captions mention objects that are not present in the ground-truth object annotations. Following prior work, we report both CHAIR S and CHAIR I ,defined as: 

CI = |hallucinated objects ||all mentioned objects | ,CS = |captions with hallucinated objects ||all captions | .

Here, CS measures the proportion of captions con-taining at least one hallucinated object, while CI

measures the proportion of hallucinated object in-stances among all mentioned objects. Lower values indicate fewer object hallucinations. 

POPE. Polling-based Object Probing Evaluation (POPE) (Li et al., 2023) evaluates object halluci-nation through binary object-existence questions. Given an image, POPE asks questions in the for-mat of “ Is there a <object> in the image? ”and compares the model’s yes/no responses with ground-truth labels. It includes three evaluation settings: random , popular , and adversarial , where absent objects are sampled randomly, from frequent object categories, or from objects that frequently co-occur with present objects. We report accuracy and F1 score, where higher values indicate stronger object grounding ability. 

MMHal-Bench. MMHal-Bench (Sun et al., 2024) is designed to evaluate hallucinations in open-ended multimodal responses. It contains chal-lenging image-question pairs that require models to generate visually grounded answers rather than re-lying on language priors. The benchmark evaluates both response quality and hallucination severity, making it suitable for assessing whether a model can produce helpful yet faithful answers. We use MMHal-Bench to examine whether RC-DPO re-duces hallucinations in more natural open-ended vision-language interactions. 

GPT-4 Assisted Evaluation. To quantify hallu-cinations in detailed image descriptions, we adopt GPT-4 assisted evaluation following established protocols. Specifically, models are prompted to generate detailed captions for images from the Vi-sual Genome dataset (Krishna et al., 2017), and GPT-4 is used to identify hallucinated or contra-dictory statements by comparing the generated de-scriptions with the ground-truth annotations. This evaluation complements object-centric metrics by capturing broader hallucination types, such as at-tribute, position, and relation errors. Following the judge-based protocol, GPT-4 is instructed to mark statements that are inconsistent with the vi-sual annotations and to summarize the degree of hallucination in the generated response. 

AMBER. AMBER (Wang et al., 2023) is an LLM-free multi-dimensional benchmark for eval-uating hallucinations in MLLMs. It covers both generative and discriminative evaluation settings and considers multiple hallucination types, includ-ing existence, attribute, and relation hallucinations. Instead of relying on an external LLM judge, AM-BER provides fine-grained annotations and auto-matic evaluation protocols, enabling scalable and reproducible hallucination assessment. 

MME. MME (Fu et al., 2026) is a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating multimodal perception and cognition abilities. It contains fine-grained image-grounded questions across multiple cate-gories, including object recognition, OCR, count-ing, commonsense reasoning, and other visual un-14 Table 3: Comparison of RC-DPO with baseline methods on the POPE benchmark.                                                                                  

> Model Method Random Popular Adversarial
> Accuracy F1 Score Accuracy F1 Score Accuracy F1 Score ThinkLite-VL
> Vanilla 88.37% 86.98% 86.73% 85.41% 85.73% 84.48% VCD 88.57% 87.23% 86.97% 85.74% 86.07% 84.87% SID 88.87% 87.66% 86.97% 85.80% 86.10% 85.06% RLAIF-V 87.90% 86.34% 86.73% 85.22% 85.40% 83.97% OPA-DPO 89.23% 88.09% 87.40% 86.33% 86.13% 85.16% RC-DPO 90.73% 90.07% 88.03% 87.55% 86.00% 85.73%
> OpenVLThinker
> Vanilla 85.77% 83.52% 84.73% 82.52% 84.20% 82.02% VCD 86.40% 84.38% 85.47% 83.51% 84.37% 82.41% SID 86.77% 84.86% 85.73% 83.90% 84.53% 82.63% RLAIF-V 84.53% 81.78% 83.63% 80.86% 82.93% 80.20% OPA-DPO 87.27% 85.53% 85.87% 84.19% 85.20% 83.57%
> RC-DPO 87.63% 86.20% 86.00% 84.46% 84.87% 83.41%

derstanding tasks. The benchmark uses a unified question-answering format to assess whether mod-els can produce accurate and image-grounded re-sponses. It reports separate scores for perception and cognition, enabling a more detailed analysis of model capabilities. We use MME to examine whether RC-DPO preserves general multimodal understanding while mitigating hallucinations. 

MMBench. MMBench (Liu et al., 2024c) is a large-scale multimodal benchmark designed to evaluate diverse vision-language abilities. It con-tains carefully curated multiple-choice questions covering fine-grained perception, attribute recogni-tion, spatial understanding, logical reasoning, and commonsense reasoning. MMBench also adopts robust evaluation strategies to reduce answer-position bias and improve evaluation reliability. 

VMCBench. VMCBench (Zhang et al., 2025) is a multiple-choice vision-language benchmark con-structed by converting diverse VQA datasets into a unified evaluation format. It covers a wide range of visual and linguistic contexts, including percep-tion, recognition, reasoning, and commonsense un-derstanding, and is designed to provide scalable, consistent, and reproducible evaluation of VLMs. By using multiple-choice questions, VMCBench reduces ambiguity in open-ended evaluation while preserving the difficulty of visual understanding tasks. Its diverse data sources and unified format make it suitable for assessing whether a method generalizes beyond a specific task or dataset. We use VMCBench to evaluate the generalization abil-ity across diverse multimodal reasoning scenarios. 

MMVP. MMVP (Tong et al., 2024) is designed to diagnose the visual shortcomings of multimodal models. It highlights failure cases where mod-els tend to rely on language priors or insufficient visual representations, particularly when images contain subtle but semantically critical visual dif-ferences. The benchmark consists of challenging visual patterns that require careful perception and fine-grained discrimination. We use MMVP to as-sess whether fine-grained visual grounding ability is preserved after optimization. 

D.3 Implementation Details SFT Format Alignment. We conduct the SFT warm-up with LoRA for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. For all models, LoRA is applied to the language-model components, while the vision en-coder remains frozen. The LoRA rank is set to 8, and the scaling factor is set to 16. We train each model for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 5e−5, us-ing AdamW as the optimizer and a linear warmup-decay scheduler. The maximum sequence length is set to 2048, and the global batch size is set to 64. Training is performed with bfloat16 precision and takes about 1.5 hours on four L20 GPUs. 

Positive Sample Construction. For MCTS-based positive sample construction, we adopt the UCB1 algorithm for node selection to balance tra-jectory quality and diversity. To control the search cost, we set the maximum number of children per node to 3, the maximum depth to 10, and the maxi-mum number of search iterations to 30. During the simulation stage, Qwen3-VL (Bai et al., 2025) is 15 Table 4: Comparison of RC-DPO with baseline methods on the MMHal-Bench.                                                                    

> Method MM-Eureka R1-Onevision ThinkLite-VL OpenVLThinker Avg Score ↑Hal Rate ↓Avg Score ↑Hal Rate ↓Avg Score ↑Hal Rate ↓Avg Score ↑Hal Rate ↓
> Vanilla 3.33 54.17% 2.66 65.62% 2.56 68.75% 2.91 63.54% VCD 3.24 54.17% 2.57 68.75% 3.29 55.21% 2.98 61.46% SID 2.99 61.46% 2.68 66.67% 3.27 55.21% 2.91 63.54% RLAIF-V 3.10 57.29% 2.97 59.38% 3.01 60.42% 2.83 61.46% OPA-DPO 3.27 54.17% 2.86 62.50% 3.35 55.21% 2.79 66.67% RC-DPO 4.01 40.62% 3.29 55.21% 3.75 43.75% 3.34 52.08% Vanilla OPA-DPO RC-DPO
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> CHAIR S
> R1-Onevision
> Vanilla OPA-DPO RC-DPO
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> CHAIR S
> MM-Eureka
> Vanilla OPA-DPO RC-DPO
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> CHAIR S
> ThinkLite-VL
> Full Response CoT Answer

Figure 6: Segment-level CHAIR S results on Object HalBench. We compare Vanilla, OPA-DPO, and RC-DPO across three MLRMs, and report CHAIR S scores for the full response, CoT, and final answer separately. 

used as the verifier to score each trajectory based on the prompt shown in Figure 10. 

Negative Sample Construction. For negative sample construction, we compute image-to-CoT attention scores to quantify the visual relevance of CoT tokens, and prune the top-ranked important tokens to construct corrupted CoTs. We use all attention layers and heads to calculate the scores and set the pruning ratio to r = 20% . Since one word may correspond to multiple subword tokens, we apply max pooling over subword-level scores to obtain word-level importance scores and determine the words to be removed. 

Preference learning. In the preference learning stage, we optimize the policy model with the com-bined RC-DPO objective. The SFT-warmed model 

πSFT is used as the fixed reference model πref . We train the model for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 1e−6 and a batch size of 32. The maximum se-quence length is set to 2048, and Adam is used as the optimizer. This training stage takes around 4 hours on four L20 GPUs. 

E More Experimental Results 

E.1 POPE Evaluation 

Table 3 provides additional POPE results on ThinkLite-VL and OpenVLThinker, complement-ing the main results reported in Table 2. Despite the stronger vanilla performance of these models, RC-DPO consistently improves over the vanilla base-lines across all three POPE settings and achieves the best results in most metrics. On average across the random, popular, and adversarial settings, RC-DPO improves the F1 score by 2.16% on ThinkLite-VL and 2.00% on OpenVLThinker. Moreover, RC-DPO outperforms other baselines in most settings, especially on ThinkLite-VL, where it achieves the best F1 score under all three settings. These results further demonstrate the robustness and generaliz-ability of RC-DPO on stronger MLRM backbones. 

E.2 Object HalBench Evaluation 

To provide a more fine-grained analysis, we de-compose each generated response into CoT and final-answer segments, and compute CHAIR S for the full response, CoT, and answer separately. As shown in Figure 6, the vanilla models exhibit sub-stantially higher hallucination scores in the CoT than in the final answer, which largely contributes 16 Table 5: Comparison of RC-DPO with baseline methods on the AMBER benchmark. 

Model Method Generative Discriminative 

CHAIR ↓ Cover ↑ HalRate ↓ Cog ↓ Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score MM-Eureka 

Vanilla 4.0 59.3 21.2 1.2 85.99 87.30 91.65 89.41 VCD 4.8 61.5 24.3 1.4 86.22 87.60 91.63 89.57 SID 4.6 60.7 23.7 1.1 86.02 87.61 91.13 89.33 RLAIF-V 4.1 56.0 18.0 1.1 85.62 86.44 92.21 89.22 OPA-DPO 5.1 57.5 21.5 1.6 86.23 87.28 92.11 89.63 RC-DPO 3.9 56.2 16.2 1.0 86.34 87.62 91.83 89.67 

R1-Onevision 

Vanilla 6.6 63.7 35.6 2.1 70.23 85.28 65.16 73.87 VCD 7.8 63.9 40.4 2.0 70.69 86.03 65.21 74.18 SID 7.9 64.7 39.1 2.1 70.39 85.46 65.26 74.00 RLAIF-V 6.8 64.4 36.8 2.4 72.40 86.09 68.32 76.18 OPA-DPO 6.6 62.9 32.8 1.8 77.36 86.76 76.64 81.38 RC-DPO 4.4 59.5 20.8 1.2 85.28 87.52 90.05 88.76 

ThinkLite-VL 

Vanilla 4.0 58.3 18.3 1.0 86.38 88.97 90.09 89.52 VCD 4.6 58.1 20.2 1.0 86.46 89.60 89.41 89.50 SID 4.4 57.8 19.8 1.0 85.78 89.40 88.49 88.94 RLAIF-V 4.4 57.9 21.6 1.5 86.42 89.13 89.95 89.53 OPA-DPO 4.6 61.5 25.2 1.8 86.73 89.10 90.54 89.81 RC-DPO 3.8 56.8 15.2 1.0 86.80 89.56 90.07 89.81 Vanilla VCD SID RLAIF-V OPA-DPO RC-DPO 

> 76
> 78
> 80
> 82
> 84
> Score

Figure 7: Overall MMBench scores of RC-DPO and baseline methods on MM-Eureka-7B. 

to the high hallucination rate of the full response. OPA-DPO, based on response-level preference op-timization, alleviates hallucinations to some extent on several models. However, due to the answer-shortcut phenomenon discussed in Section 2, CoT hallucination remains significantly higher than an-swer hallucination, indicating that reasoning chains are still insufficiently aligned. In contrast, RC-DPO strengthens CoT-level alignment by explicitly opti-mizing the reasoning-conditioned preference signal. As a result, it reduces hallucinations not only in the final answer but also in the CoT segment, lead-ing to a more consistent reduction in full-response hallucination. These results further demonstrate that explicit reasoning-chain alignment is crucial Vanilla VCD SID RLAIF-V OPA-DPO RC-DPO 

> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> Accuracy (%)

Figure 8: MMVP accuracy of RC-DPO and baseline methods on MM-Eureka-7B. 

for mitigating hallucinations in MLRMs. 

E.3 MMHal-Bench Evaluation 

MMHal-Bench evaluates hallucinations in open-ended multimodal responses. Following the stan-dard evaluation protocol, we prompt each model to generate answers for the image-question pairs in MMHal-Bench, and then use GPT-4 to judge the response quality and hallucination severity. We report the average response score and hallucination rate, where a higher average score indicates bet-ter answer quality and a lower hallucination rate indicates fewer hallucinated contents. As shown in Table 4, RC-DPO consistently achieves the best performance across all four ML-RMs. Specifically, RC-DPO obtains the highest 17 Table 6: Performance comparison of RC-DPO and baseline methods on the MME benchmark with MM-Eureka.                                                                        

> Method Perception Cognition
> Total Position Color Scene OCR Total Commonsense Calculation Translation Code
> Vanilla 1595.77 141.67 180.00 145.00 170.00 706.79 144.29 192.50 185.00 185.00
> VCD 1596.14 131.67 165.00 148.00 162.50 715.36 152.86 200.00 177.50 185.00 SID 1596.38 135.00 175.00 146.50 175.00 705.00 150.00 192.50 177.50 185.00 RLAIF-V 1539.52 151.67 185.00 139.75 170.00 708.93 161.43 200.00 170.00 177.50 OPA-DPO 1557.08 141.67 180.00 147.50 147.50 702.86 147.86 185.00 192.50 177.50 RC-DPO 1613.03 153.33 185.00 150.50 192.50 718.93 156.43 200.00 185.00 177.50

Table 7: Performance comparison of RC-DPO and baseline methods on VMCBench with MM-Eureka                                                                              

> Method Overall MMMU MathVista AI2D VQAv2 SEEDBench General TextVQA MMStar DocVQA A-OKVQA
> Vanilla 80.88 57.93 73.27 79.04 90.05 76.05 83.52 96.63 63.66 91.76 88.47 VCD 80.95 57.93 74.63 79.73 89.81 78.52 84.25 96.4 65.08 90.87 89.18 SID 80.72 58.89 74.22 78.59 89.58 79.26 83.99 95.51 61.76 91.09 88.71 RLAIF-V 80.85 57.45 69.31 80.87 90.51 79.26 84.21 96.4 65.8 95.32 88.71 OPA-DPO 81.39 58.89 73.76 77.9 90.51 80.74 84.09 96.85 64.61 98.44 89.65 RC-DPO 81.55 59.62 74.26 80.41 91.44 80.25 84.73 97.53 65.08 98.44 90.12

average score and the lowest hallucination rate on four MLRMs. The improvement is particularly clear on MM-Eureka, where RC-DPO increases the average score from 3.33 to 4.01 and reduces the hal-lucination rate from 54.17% to 40.62% compared with the vanilla model. Similar trends are observed on the other models, demonstrating that RC-DPO effectively improves open-ended response faithful-ness while maintaining answer quality. 

E.4 AMBER Evaluation 

We also report the results on the AMBER bench-mark in Table 5, which includes both generative and discriminative hallucination evaluations. RC-DPO achieves consistently strong performance across the three evaluated MLRMs. In the gener-ative setting, RC-DPO obtains the lowest CHAIR, HalRate, and Cog scores on all models, indicat-ing that it effectively reduces hallucinated content while improving response faithfulness. Specifically, the improvements are particularly significant on R1-Onevision, where RC-DPO reduces HalRate from 35.6 to 20.8 compared with the vanilla model. In the discriminative setting, RC-DPO also achieves the best overall performance in most metrics, espe-cially improving the F1 score from 73.87 to 88.76 on R1-Onevision. These results further demon-strate that RC-DPO generalizes well to both open-ended generation and discriminative evaluations. 

E.5 MME Evaluation 

To assess the impact of RC-DPO on general mul-timodal performance, we evaluate MM-Eureka on the MME benchmark, as shown in Table 6. RC-DPO achieves the best overall performance in both perception and cognition categories. In the percep-tion subset, RC-DPO consistently improves fine-grained visual understanding, obtaining the highest scores on position, color, scene, and OCR. No-tably, the OCR score increases from 170.00 to 192.50 compared with the vanilla model, indicat-ing stronger visual-text grounding after reasoning-chain alignment. In the cognition subset, RC-DPO also achieves the highest total score and performs competitively across multiple subtasks. These re-sults show that RC-DPO does not sacrifice general multimodal capabilities while mitigating halluci-nations. Instead, it further improves the model’s perception and reasoning performance. 

E.6 MMBench Evaluation 

MMBench is a general-purpose multimodal bench-mark designed to evaluate the comprehensive vision-language understanding ability of MLLMs. Following the official evaluation protocol, we prompt each model to answer multiple-choice ques-tions and report the overall score. This benchmark allows us to examine whether hallucination mitiga-tion affects general multimodal capability beyond hallucination-oriented evaluation. As shown in Figure 7, RC-DPO achieves the highest overall score among all compared meth-ods. Compared with the vanilla model and existing baselines, RC-DPO brings consistent improvement, indicating that reasoning-chain alignment does not compromise general multimodal understanding. In-18 stead, by encouraging more faithful intermediate reasoning, RC-DPO further improves the overall performance on broad vision-language tasks. 

E.7 MMVP Evaluation 

MMVP focuses on evaluating fine-grained visual perception and is designed to expose visual short-comings of multimodal models, especially cases where models rely on language priors instead of carefully grounding their answers in the image. Following the official protocol, we evaluate each method on MMVP and report the accuracy. As shown in Figure 8, RC-DPO achieves the best accuracy among all compared methods. The improvement over the vanilla model and baseline approaches suggests that RC-DPO preserves and enhances fine-grained visual grounding ability dur-ing hallucination mitigation. These results fur-ther demonstrate that explicitly aligning reason-ing chains can improve visual faithfulness without sacrificing perception-oriented capabilities. 

E.8 VMCBench Evaluation 

VMCBench offers a comprehensive evaluation of multimodal capability by covering diverse subtasks, including mathematical reasoning, diagram under-standing, general VQA, text-rich image understand-ing, document comprehension, and knowledge-based VQA. Therefore, it provides a broader test of whether hallucination mitigation preserves gen-eral reasoning and perception abilities. As shown in Table 7, RC-DPO achieves the highest overall score on MM-Eureka, improving the vanilla model from 80.88 to 81.55 and outperforming all base-line methods. This gain is not driven by a single subtask; RC-DPO achieves the best results on mul-tiple subtasks, including MMMU, VQAv2, and DocVQA, covering both perception-oriented and reasoning-oriented evaluations. These results in-dicate that RC-DPO improves overall multimodal performance while maintaining strong capabilities across diverse tasks. 

F Prompt 

In this section, we present the prompts used in our experiments. Specifically, Figure 9 shows the few-shot prompt used to generate well-structured rea-soning trajectories for MCTS-based positive sam-ple construction, while Figure 10 illustrates the ver-ifier prompt used for trajectory evaluation during the simulation stage of MCTS. 

G Visualization Results 

To visually demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-proach, we present qualitative captioning examples on Object HalBench in Figure 11. The results show that RC-DPO generates more visually grounded descriptions and effectively reduces hallucinations compared with baseline methods. 19 Prompt 

You are a multimodal reasoning assistant. You are given an image and a question about the image. Your task is to answer the question accurately by reasoning step by step STRICTLY based on what is visible in the image. You MUST strictly follow the format below. ===================== OUTPUT FORMAT ===================== You MUST produce TWO sections in the following order: <think> REASONING CONTENT </think> <answer> FINAL ANSWER CONTENT </answer> ============= REASONING FORMAT (INSIDE <think>) ============= 1. Think step by step using explicit reasoning. 2. Each reasoning step MUST: - Describe exactly ONE logical step - Be directly grounded in clearly observable visual evidence - Avoid unsupported assumptions or speculation - End with the special token <END> =========== FINAL ANSWER FORMAT (INSIDE <answer>) =========== After completing all reasoning steps, provide the final answer. The final answer MUST: - Be written as a coherent and natural paragraph - Directly and fully answer the question - Be fluent and precise in expression - NOT include <END> ===================== IMPORTANT RULES ===================== - Do NOT repeat the question. - Do NOT add extra explanations outside the specified format. - Do NOT introduce information that is not supported by the image. - Do NOT guess or infer details that cannot be visually verified. - Do NOT produce any content outside <think> and <answer>. ===================== EXAMPLE 1 ===================== Image: A photo shows several crafting tools on a table, including scissors, a hole punch, and cutting tools. Question: Who is more likely to use these tools, a leather crafter or a paper crafter? Answer: <think> ### Step 1: The image shows tools such as scissors, a hole punch, and cutting implements placed together. <END> ### Step 2 ... </think> <answer> ... </answer> ===================== EXAMPLE 2 ===================== Image: A woman stands on a red carpet holding a microphone, with cameras pointed toward her and brand logos visible in the background. Question: What are the main elements in this image? Answer: <think> ### Step 1: The image clearly shows a woman ... <END> ### Step 2 ... </think> <answer> ... </answer> ===================== NOW ANSWER THE QUESTION ===================== 

> Figure 9: Few-shot prompt used to generate well-structured reasoning trajectories for MCTS-based positive sample construction. Parts of the demonstrations are omitted due to space limitations.

20 Prompt 

You are a strict hallucination inspector for multimodal question answering. You will be given: - An image - A question - A model-generated answer Important rules: - The image is the ONLY ground truth. - You must rely ONLY on what is clearly visible in the image. - Do NOT assume, infer, or guess any information that is not visually evident. - If something cannot be confirmed from the image, treat it as NOT SUPPORTED. - Ignore fluency, style, and completeness. - Focus ONLY on hallucinations. Step 1: Decompose the model-generated answer into individual factual statements (atomic claims). Each statement should describe a single object, attribute, action, or relationship. Step 2: For each statement, judge whether it is: - SUPPORTED by the image (clearly visible) - NOT SUPPORTED by the image (not visible or cannot be confirmed) - CONTRADICTED by the image (clearly inconsistent with the image) Hallucination includes: - Mentioning objects not visible in the image - Inventing attributes, actions, or relationships not supported by the image - Making claims that contradict the image content - Making assumptions beyond what is directly observable (e.g., intent, identity, causality) - Adding unnecessary or irrelevant statements that are not required to answer the question Step 3: Briefly summarize: - The number of hallucinated statements - Their types (NOT SUPPORTED or CONTRADICTED) Step 4: Assign a final score based STRICTLY on hallucination severity: - **2**: No hallucination. All statements are directly supported by the image and relevant to the question. - **1**: Minor issues. One or two statements are not fully supported or slightly irrelevant. - **0**: Major hallucination. Multiple unsupported statements or any clear contradiction. Output format (STRICT): Reason: <one or two sentences explaining hallucination judgment> Score: <0|1|2> Do NOT output anything else. ===================== INPUT ===================== [Question]: {} [Model-Generated Answer]: {} ===================== OUTPUT ===================== 

> Figure 10: Prompt used to verify the quality of CoT-answer trajectories during MCTS sampling.

21 Instruction 

(max new tokens= 1024 )

# Provide a thorough description 

# of the given image. 

Vanilla: "<think>\ nThe image shows a kitchen counter with various objects. In the foreground, there is a butternut squash placed 

on top of two bananas . The squash is light orange and has a long, narrow shape with a slightly curved neck. The bananas are 

yellow with some brown spots, indicating they are ripe. To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a small, round, metallic 

object that appears to be a kitchen scale. The scale has a reflective surface on top and a digital display. In the background, there is 

a red decorative bowl and a plastic container. There is also a box of what looks like a food product and a bottle of milk. The over 

all setting suggests a domestic kitchen environment.\n</think>\n<answer>\ nThe image shows a kitchen counter with a butter 

nut squash placed on top of two bananas . The squash is light orange and has a long, narrow shape with a slightly curved neck. 

The bananas are yellow with some brown spots. To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a small, round, metallic object 

that appears to be a kitchen scale. In the background, there is a red decorative bowl and a plastic container . There is also a box of 

what looks like a food product and a bottle of milk. The overall setting suggests a domestic kitchen environment.</answer>" 

RLAIF-V: "<think>\ nThe image shows a kitchen countertop with various items on it. In the foreground, there is a butternut 

squash placed on top of two bananas . The squash is light orange and has a long, narrow shape with a slightly curved neck. The 

bananas are yellow with some brown spots, indicating they are ripe. To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a small, 

round, metallic object that appears to be a kitchen scale. The scale has a reflective surface on its top. In the background, there is 

a red decorative bowl, a plastic container, and a bottle of what looks like a condiment or sauce . The lighting in the image is 

warm, suggesting it might be taken in the evening or in a dimly lit room . The overall scene gives a casual, homey feel.\n 

</think>\n <answer>\ nThe image shows a kitchen countertop with a butternut squash placed on top of two bananas. The squash 

is light orange and has a long, narrow shape with a slightly curved neck. The bananas are yellow with some brown spots, 

indicating they are ripe. To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a small, round, metallic object that appears to be a 

kitchen scale. The scale has a reflective surface on its top. In the background, there is a red decorative bowl, a plastic container, 

and a bottle of what looks like a condiment or sauce . The lighting in the image is warm, suggesting it might be taken in the 

evening or in a dimly lit room . The overall scene gives a casual, homey feel.\n</answer>" 

OPA-DPO: "<think>The image shows a kitchen counter with various objects. In the foreground, there is a butternut squash 

placed on top of two bananas . The squash is light orange in color and has a long, narrow shape with a slightly curved neck. The 

bananas are yellow with some brown spots, indicating they are ripe. To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a small, 

round, metallic object that appears to be a kitchen tool or utensil. In the background, there is a red decorative bowl and a plastic 

container. The countertop is a light color, and there are some items in the background, including a box and a bottle . The overall 

setting suggests a kitchen environment.</think><answer>The image shows a butternut squash placed on top of two bananas, 

creating an amusing visual effect . The squash is positioned in such a way that it resembles a human figure, with the neck of the 

squash forming the head and the bananas serving as legs . This playful arrangement is likely intended to be humorous or 

whimsical , as it creates an unexpected and entertaining image. The presence of other kitchen items in the background, such as a 

red decorative bowl and a plastic container, suggests that this scene takes place in a kitchen setting. The combination of the 

squash and bananas, along with the other objects, creates a casual and homey atmosphere.</answer>" 

RC-DPO: "<think>\n### Step 1: The image shows a kitchen counter with various objects placed on it. <END>\n### Step 2: In 

the foreground, there is a butternut squash positioned upright, with its stem pointing upwards. <END>\n### Step 3: Below the 

squash, there are three bananas arranged in a row. <END>\n### Step 4: To the right of the squash and bananas, there is a digital 

scale with a metallic surface. <END>\n### Step 5: In the background, there is a red decorative bowl and a plastic container, 

possibly for food storage. <END>\n### Step 6: The lighting in the image is warm, suggesting it might be taken in a home 

kitchen environment. <END>\n</think>\n<answer>\ nThe image depicts a kitchen counter with a butternut squash standing 

upright and three bananas placed below it. To the right, there is a digital scale, and in the background, there is a red decorative 

bowl and a plastic container. The setting appears to be a home kitchen, illuminated by warm lighting.\n</answer>" Figure 11: Visualization results comparing our RC-DPO and other methods on MM-Eureka-7B. Hallucinations are marked in red. 

22