Title: An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20144v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:26:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning 

# Jiani Zhang 

Google jianizhang@google.com 

# Sercan Ö. Arık 

Google soarik@google.com 

# Cosmin Arad 

Google carad@google.com 

# Fatma Özcan 

Google fozcan@google.com 

# Alon Halevy 

Google halevy@google.com 

## Abstract 

As LLM-driven autonomous agents evolve to perform complex, multi-step tasks that require integrating multiple datasets, the prob-lem of discovering relevant data sources becomes a key bottleneck. Beyond the challenge posed by the sheer volume of available data sources, data-source selection is difficult because the semantics of data are extremely nuanced and require considering many aspects of the data. To address this, we introduce the Metadata Reasoner , an agen-tic approach to metadata reasoning, designed to identify a small set of data sources that are both sufficient and minimal for a given analytical task. The Metadata Reasoner leverages a table-search engine to retrieve candidate tables, and then autonomously consults various aspects of the available metadata to determine whether the candidates fit the requirements of the task. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the Metadata Reasoner 

through a series of empirical studies. Evaluated on the real-world KramaBench datasets for data selection, our approach achieves an average F1-score of 83.16%, outperforming state-of-the-art base-lines by a substantial margin of 32 percentage points. Furthermore, evaluations on a newly-created synthetic benchmark based on the BIRD data lake reveal that the Metadata Reasoner is highly ro-bust against redundant and low-quality tables that may be in the data lake. In this noisy environment, it maintains an average of 85.5% F1-score for selecting the right datasets and demonstrates a 99% success rate in avoiding low-quality data. 

## 1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of LLM-driven autonomous agents has fun-damentally transformed data-centric workflows [ 13 , 41 ], enabling unprecedented levels of automation. These agents hold the promise to autonomously execute high-level tasks, such as orchestrating complex data engineering pipelines [ 16 ] or answering business analytics questions. However, a primary bottleneck in developing these agents lies in the effective discovery and selection of data sources that are relevant to a given task [ 17 , 36 ]. This challenge is especially acute when these agents are meant to operate over massive-scale repositories present in modern data lakes. In addition to the sheer number of available data sources, data selection faces two additional challenges. The first challenge is that deciding whether a data source is relevant to a task is extremely nuanced. The schema and textual description of a table are obvi-ously crucial, but there are a multitude of factors that need to be considered, including the quality and recency of the data, whether it is governed, how it was created (including its code and data lin-eage), the purpose it was created for and other hidden assumptions that may have gone into its creation. While present day data cat-alogs can accommodate many of these aspects, they are built for humans. They rely on rich interfaces and implicit context that a human analyst can effortlessly interpret, yet this context remains opaque to an LLM agent. The second challenge is that executing a task typically requires a combination of data sources rather than a single one. In doing so, it is necessary to guarantee that the collection of data sources together covers all the entities and attributes needed for the task, and that the data sources can be combined (e.g., via joins or unions) to yield the correct result. One might assume that the expanding context windows of mod-ern LLMs would solve this by allowing agents to ingest vast amounts of metadata and reason over it directly [ 6 , 7, 37 ]. However, perfor-mance often degrades with context length due to attention dilution across extended contexts, that causes the model to overlook crucial schema constraints [ 23 , 24 , 33 ]. Furthermore, the scale of enterprise data lakes makes reasoning over the entire metadata repository computationally prohibitive. To manage the sheer scale of available data sources and their associated computational costs, the de facto approach to data dis-covery today utilizes ranking-based retrieval systems [ 2 , 4 ]. The systems may integrate multiple retrieval signals: a lexical full-text search (such as BM25 [ 30 ]) to handle exact string matches, a seman-tic vector search that encodes the descriptions of data sources into an embedding space to capture its semantics [ 27 ], and a re-ranking mechanism to refine final ranking. However, because these methods are inherently designed to score and retrieve datasets individually, they remain inadequate for retrieving combinations or integrations of multiple data sources needed for a task. Consider queries re-quiring attributes 𝐴 1 and 𝐴 2 from distinct tables: a ranking-based search may return sources highly relevant to 𝐴 1 while omitting any sources relevant to 𝐴 2. Even if the search does find tables cov-ering both attributes, these tables may not be connected, either because they contain different sets of entities or because we need an intermediate table to serve as a relational bridge. Furthermore, when a join path exists, determining whether it is semantically valid (for instance, distinguishing between a customer table joined to orders versus returns ) requires reasoning about the intent of the relationship, not just the presence of a shared key. Ranking models optimize for topic relevance but are not designed to capture other aspects of metadata reasoning. This paper introduces the Metadata Reasoner , an agentic ap-proach to metadata reasoning, which is designed to identify a small 

> arXiv:2604.20144v1 [cs.DB] 22 Apr 2026 Zhang et al.

set of data sources that are both sufficient and minimal for a given analytical task. In addition to an analytical task (e.g., a query), Meta-data Reasoner takes as input a comprehensive metadata catalog that stores all known properties of the available data sources. This catalog captures not just the schemas and text descriptions of tables, but also their creation history, data quality metrics, usage patterns, and broader business definitions such as glossaries or ontologies. Rather than bringing all available metadata into the LLM’s con-text window, Metadata Reasoner executes a series of steps that involve retrieving candidate tables, reasoning about the metadata attached to them, and consulting specialized tools that provide additional metadata. For example, these specialized tools may de-termine whether two tables can be meaningfully joined, whether a particular value is present in a given table, or consult a business glossary to better understand the intent of the task. Metadata Reasoner autonomously decides which metadata to consult at any given point, depending on how it is progressing towards its goal. We evaluate the proposed Metadata Reasoner in two environ-ments for data selection: KramaBench [ 20 ], a real-world benchmark representing messy data lake across six diverse domains, and a syn-thetically scaled-up version of the BIRD dataset [ 22 ]. We select KramaBench because it challenges systems with high-cardinality search spaces (approximately 1,500 candidate tables in the Astron-omy domain) and requires multi-source reasoning. To systemati-cally stress-test the system’s resilience against the complexities of modern enterprise data environments, we expand the BIRD dataset by injecting horizontal partitions, redundant duplicates, and struc-tural noise. We compare our framework against state-of-the-art vector search methods and an LLM-powered hybrid retrieval base-line, Pneuma [2]. Our empirical results demonstrate that the Metadata Reasoner 

achieves superior table selection accuracy, yielding an average F1-score of 83.16% on KramaBench, substantially outperforming both the standard vector search baseline (50.77%) and Pneuma (45.12%). The performance boost is most substantial in the large-scale As-tronomy domain, where our method achieves an F1-score of 72.31%, more than doubling the performance of both vector search (32.80%) and Pneuma (27.70%). Furthermore, in the highly noisy synthetic BIRD data lakes containing hundreds of similar-looking tables, the Metadata Reasoner maintains an average F1-score of 85.5%, compared to just 30.0% for the vector search baseline. The Meta-data Reasoner achieves near perfect discrimination against noise-injected tables, whereas the baseline retrieves invalid or low-quality tables 35.6% of the time. Crucially, this high-precision data selection directly translates to downstream success: in an end-to-end Text-to-SQL evaluation, using the tables recommended by the Metadata Reasoner improved average SQL execution accuracy to 71.28%, up from the 56.38% achieved by top-10 vector retrieval. 

## 2 Related Works 

Dataset search and Data Integration. Dataset search aims to fulfill information needs across vast collections like data lakes [ 5,10 , 12 , 15 , 21 ]. While early keyword-based methods often struggle with semantic ambiguity [ 4, 29 ], later approaches identify joinable and unionable tables [ 18 , 28 ] utilizing approximate containment search [ 3, 40 ], knowledge graphs [ 19 ] or language models [ 11 ]. Re-cently, systems like Pneuma integrated LLMs for hybrid search [ 2 ]. Concurrently, classical data integration systems [ 9] rely on formal descriptions of data sources and query translation is performed by a specialized algorithm (e.g., answering queries using views [ 14 ]). Formal descriptions cannot capture nuances that arise in real data lakes and which are best described in natural language. The Meta-data Reasoner , on the other hand, accepts nuanced descriptions of data sources and reasons about them appropriately. 

Retrieval within agentic systems. Recent advancements in agen-tic information retrieval [ 34 ] and reasoning-intensive retrieval [ 35 ,39 ] utilize LLMs to navigate dynamic information states via multi-step reasoning, query expansion, specialized dense models, and advanced reranking techniques [ 8, 26 , 32 ]. However, these systems typically process unstructured text. Meanwhile, Metadata Rea-soner operates on structured and semi-structured data, such as metadata catalogs and database schemas, and selects a combination of data sources rather than ranking individual items 

Improving LLMs agents. As LLMs have evolved to interact with external tools [ 31 ], a major bottleneck has been context window saturation caused by providing exhaustive API documentation. Re-cent studies address this by abstracting verbose documentation into concise instructions [ 38 ] or employing structured thought-action-observation loops [ 25 , 42 ]. Inspired by these advances, Metadata Reasoner translates high-level tasks into coordinated retrieval steps across diverse metadata catalogs. While tool-use frameworks like the model context protocol require agents to interact with remote external servers, there is a growing shift toward agent skills [1]. Skills are modular, filesystem-based packages of instruc-tions, scripts, and metadata that provide reusable domain expertise. Currently, the Metadata Reasoner operates as a tool-use agent. However, it can easily transition to a skill-based architecture. The specific task decompositions, procedural instructions, and func-tional boundaries established in this study provide a direct blue-print for packaging metadata reasoning into reusable agent skills. 

## 3 The Architecture of the Metadata Reasoner 

We first formally define the goal of the Metadata Reasoner and then describe its architecture and underlying design rationale. 

## 3.1 Problem formulation 

The Metadata Reasoner accepts two inputs :

A data task 𝑄 : a typical example of a task is a question that can be answered by an SQL query, or a machine learning prediction or cause analysis task that requires Python code. 

A metadata catalog T : The catalog encapsulates all known prop-erties of the available data sources within the data lake. While we use the term tables for simplicity throughout this paper, these resources can also encompass collections of structured and semi-structured datasets, such as those found in Web tables and open data portals. The catalog captures both structural and semantic information, including schemas and textual descriptions of tables and their attributes. It also includes information surrounding the tables, such as their lineage, quality, and usage patterns. The catalog also contains semantic information that is not attached to a specific An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning 

Figure 1: The architecture of the Metadata Reasoner .Given an analytic task and a metadata catalog, the agent autonomously executes a series of planning, search, and rea-soning steps. It leverages both attached metadata from re-trieved candidate tables and on-the-fly metadata accessed via specialized tools to output a sufficient and minimal set of tables, along with a natural-language justification. 

table. For example, it may contain a glossary that explains business terms in the domain of the enterprise, an ontology that describes classes of entities and relationships between them, or a semantic model of the data. The Metadata Reasoner produces two outputs : The first is 

a subset of tables 𝑇 ∗ ⊆ T . 𝑇 ∗ must satisfy the following condi-tions: (1) sufficiency (or coverage): 𝑇 ∗ should contain tables that are required to solve the input task (e.g., tables for answering a query). Specifically, this means that the tables in 𝑇 ∗ should cover all the entities and attributes relevant to 𝑄 , while ensuring that the tables can be joined correctly when needed, and (2) minimality :

𝑇 ∗ should be minimal, in the sense that no smaller strict subset of 𝑇 ∗ is sufficient for 𝑄 . This ensures that every individual table included in 𝑇 ∗ is absolutely necessary to solve the task. The Metadata Reasoner also outputs a natural-language jus-tification 𝐽 , which explicitly provides evidence supporting the sufficiency and optimality of 𝑇 ∗. This contextual grounding ensures that subsequent agents in the pipeline understand exactly why and how the retrieved tables should be used. 

Example 3.1. Figure 2 illustrates the Metadata Reasoner work-flow. The agent begins by analyzing the given query to under-stand which entities (e.g., DC and PR ) and attributes (e.g., total reports and population ) are necessary and what other constraints (e.g., all type of reports ) to look out for. Based on this analysis, the agent creates an initial plan for its reasoning. In the exam-ple, the first two steps of the plan include involving the search engine to retrieve candidate datasets for state reports and popu-lation . It then utilizes data_finder() to confirm the presence of 

DC and PR and joinability_check() to validate that disparate report categories can be unified via shared State columns. If the candidates are insufficient or lack a valid join path, the Metadata Reasoner recursively reformulates its search strategy to expand the set of candidate tables. Upon satisfying all extracted constraints, 

Figure 2: Illustrative Example of the Metadata Reasoner 

Workflow. Given an analytical task, the Metadata Rea-soner first decomposes the query into multi-faceted search plans (e.g., reports vs. population) to retrieve candidate datasets. It then uses specialized tools to confirm entity exis-tence (e.g., "Puerto Rico/DC") and to validate relational paths. The final output provides a justified selection of tables, en-suring they are both sufficient for the task and can be joined. 

the agent terminates and outputs a set of selected tables and a nat-ural language justification for their relevance. In this instance, the reasoner clarifies how the State_Identity_Theft_Reports and 

State_Fraud_and_Other_Reports tables satisfy the "all types" re-quirement, ensuring both sufficiency (coverage of all attributes) and minimality (no smaller subset satisfies the constraints). 

## 3.2 An agentic approach to metadata reasoning 

The preceding example illustrates that the agent leverages metadata across three distinct operational stages. First, during retrieval, table metadata is encoded as vectors describing the objects available to the search engine. Second, during evaluation, the agent reasons over the metadata explicitly attached to the retrieved candidate tables. Third, specialized tools provide the agent with on-demand access to highly specific metadata signals that would be impractical to provide ahead of time. Recognizing that different types of metadata are optimal for dif-ferent stages of the reasoning pipeline is the core principle driving the Metadata Reasoner ’s design. The primary challenge is con-text saturation: it is computationally impractical and detrimental to reasoning performance if we supply the agent with all available table metadata simultaneously. To overcome this, we architect the Metadata Reasoner around an orchestration agent that autonomously fetches the exact frag-ments of metadata required at any given step. In the following sections, we detail the reasoning pipeline, highlighting the specific metadata utilized at each phase. 

## 3.3 Query decomposition and planning 

Upon receiving a query 𝑄 , the agent is instructed to decompose it into a set of search constraints, including named entities, measures, temporal scopes, and granularity requirements. This enables con-structing a plan for searching the relevant tables. The agent then Zhang et al. 

executes this plan by alternating between invoking the search tool, reasoning about the retrieved tables, and consulting the specialized tools for specific information. 

## 3.4 The semantic search tool 

The agent retrieves candidate tables from the catalog through a semantic-search tool. The tool has access to a set of vectors, each representing the embedding of metadata about a table. The search is based on approximate nearest neighbor with the embedding of the query. The challenge that arises here is choosing which metadata to use in creating the embeddings of the table descriptions. A common failure mode in large-scale data lakes is semantic homogenization – when tables share high-level metadata, their embeddings become indistinguishable, degrading retrieval precision. For example, this may happen if many tables have similar schemas and nuanced differences between them occupy a small part of their description. 

3.4.1 Discrimination-Oriented Metadata Construction. To have more targeted search, we designed the embeddings to emphasize the dif-ferences between tables. Specifically, in deciding which metadata to embed, we prioritize descriptions of unique aspects, such as specific temporal or geographical scopes of a table. In addition, we ensure that technical identifiers and cryptic column names are mapped to standardized domain terminology and synonymous business logic. This helps align natural-language queries with the indexed vector embeddings of the metadata. We construct the embeddings with a two-stage LLM-driven process. In the first stage, we group tables based on semantic relatedness. In general, grouping can be done based on the table descriptions. In some cases, such as for KramaBench, the tables are organized into a directory structure that provides such a grouping. We task the LLM with identifying shared and unique variables across a set of tables. The model then generates a prompt template designed to describe individual tables by highlighting their distinguishing fea-tures relative to the group. In the second stage, we apply the prompt template to each of the tables in the group to create the differen-tiated table description. To illustrate, consider the discrimination-oriented descriptions generated via this two-stage process for tables 

0309geomag_forecast and 0310geomag_forecast . While these tables share an identical schema, they differ in temporal ranges. Consequently, our method creates a prompt template that main-tains necessary semantic context (e.g., NOAA geomagnetic Kp index forecast ), but prioritizes highlighting their specific temporal ranges. 

> Table: 0309geomag_forecast "NOAA geomagnetic Kp index forecast specifically for March 10, March 11, and March 12. The data is recorded in 3-hour intervals and consists of floating-point values representing the predicted geomagnetic activity levels for each day.
> Table: 0310geomag_forecast "NOAA geomagnetic Kp index forecast specifically for March 11, March 12, and March 13. The data provides floating-point forecast values at 3-hour intervals in Universal Time (UT).

3.4.2 Handling duplicate search results. When the agent performs multiple calls to the semantic-search tool, some tables may be re-turned for multiple search queries. If we included all the metadata for these tables again, this would pollute the agent context, leading the agent overlook distinct tables surfaced later in the retrieval results. To address this challenge, we implemented a state-aware dedupli-cation mechanism within the search tool. The mechanism maintains a session-level dictionary, S, which tracks the identifiers (table 𝐼𝐷 )and retrieval occurrences of all previously surfaced tables. For each retrieved table 𝐼𝐷 , if 𝐼𝐷 ∉ S, then the table’s metadata is added to the context window. However, if 𝐼𝐷 ∈ S , the metadata is sup-pressed and replaced by a concise recurrence indicator (e.g., "Table ID: xxx (Appeared 𝑁 times)"), and the occurrence counter in S

is incremented. These are then concatenated into a single return string. This strategy prevents the agent from becoming stuck in high-recall redundancy, forcing it to attend to previously over-looked data sources. In scenarios where a search cycle yields only duplicates, the system returns a termination signal, prompting the agent to autonomously revise its search strategy. 

## 3.5 Reasoning about retrieved tables 

Once the search engine retrieves a set of candidate tables, the agent proceeds to reason about their efficacy for the task 𝑄 . At this point, we face a choice of which metadata about a table 𝑇 to feed directly into the agent when 𝑇 is retrieved, versus which metadata to make available only on demand. We refer to these as attached metadata 

and on-the-fly metadata , respectively. Inevitably, there will be some metadata that we cannot include in the attached metadata. First, some metadata is not associated with a single table. For example, a business glossary or an ontology of the domain apply to all the data in the data lake. Second, some metadata is simply too large to add to the LLM’s context or even im-practical to compute. For example, when the Metadata Reasoner 

is considering a set of tables, it may need to decide whether the tables can be joined via some path. Pre-calculating all the possible join paths in a data lake is often impractical. Meanwhile, if the data values are hard to summarize, listing them all would saturate the context window and degrade reasoning performance. Hence, we designed the Metadata Reasoner to have access to a set of specialized tools that provide access to the on-the-fly metadata. We describe the capabilities of these tools to the agent, and we instruct the agent to use these tools if it cannot infer the required information from the attached metadata. The optimal partition between attached and on-the-fly metadata is dependent on the context in which we are applying Metadata Reasoner . This allocation hinges on several variables: metadata availability, fragment size, latency constraints, and the agent’s ca-pacity to orchestrate multiple tools. Ultimately, this partitioning strategy is a critical determinant of overall system performance. 

3.5.1 Attached metadata. The attached metadata needs to enable the agent to decide whether the table satisfies the requirements of the task 𝑄 , which includes information about its schema, temporal and spatial scope, the granularity of the data, and the other tables it refers to. In particular, we include: 

Schema Information : The physical schema of each candidate ta-ble, including the table name, column names, data types, constraints and any existing human-authored documentation. An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning 

Semantic Enrichment via Statistical Synthesis : We perform statistical profiling for each table. A data profiler calculates descrip-tive metrics such as value ranges (min/max), categorical cardinality (top-K values), and null-count ratios. These statistics are then pro-cessed by an LLM to generate natural language descriptions to save token cost. Note that all of this enrichment is done ahead of time on the catalog T .The metadata associated with the table 0309geomag_forecast 

is shown below. Compared with the discriminative description in Section 3.4.1 says the data provides "floating-point values" which is a general statement, the below table-content driven description shows detailed statistics – "values between 3.0 and 5.0, and an average of approximately 3.75". 

> Table: 0309geomag_forecast """Table Description: NOAA Kp index forecast 10 Mar - 12 Mar This table provides a geomagnetic forecast from March 10th to March 12th..Each row corresponds to a specific time interval. The columns represent the forecasted geomagnetic activity for each day. Schema: - Time_UT: STRING (NULLABLE) - "...time ranges, e.g.,
> '00-03UT '." - Mar_10: FLOAT (NULLABLE) - "Forecasted geomagnetic activity value for March 10th...ranging from 3.0 to 5.0, and an average of 3.75..." - Mar_11: FLOAT (NULLABLE) - "...for March 11th...from 3.33 and 3.67." ..."""

3.5.2 On-the-fly metadata. We provide the following tools: 

• column_profiler() : Granular column profiling is invoked when summarized descriptions lack the depth necessary for final data selection. It retrieves high-resolution signals such as exact distinct value counts, mean/median distributions, and frequency histograms. 

• data_finder() : Value-level grounding is strictly a query-time requirement, as the specific entities of interest (e.g., unique user IDs or country codes) are only known once the query is received and the candidate tables are established. This tool provides deterministic evidence of data presence. 

• joinability_check() : Just-in-time joinability analysis is essential because providing all possible pairwise joinabil-ity information to the LLM in advance is computationally wasteful. Instead, the system retrieves signals regarding for-eign key overlap and referential alignment only for specific candidate tables identified during the reasoning loop. 

## 4 Experimental Setup 

This section details the datasets we used, how we enhanced them, the baselines, and our evaluation metrics. 

## 4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate the Metadata Reasoner using two primary bench-marks to capture different facets of enterprise data challenges. 

Table 1: KramaBench Dataset Statistics. "Avg. #col." stands for the average number of columns per table in a domain. "Avg. #tables" stands for the average number of ground truth tables per task. Domain #Table Avg. #col. #Task Avg. #table 

Astronomy 1498 28.6 12 17.2 Legal 134 2.5 30 16.8 Environment 36 10.3 20 7.9 Biomedical 29 35.4 9 2.0 Wildfire 21 12.1 21 1.7 Archeology 5 16.2 12 1.5 

4.1.1 KramaBench. For real-world assessment, we utilize Kram-aBench [ 20 ], a benchmark specifically designed to simulate data lake environments across six diverse domains: astronomy, legal, environment, biomedical, wildfire, and archeology. Although Kram-aBench was originally intended to evaluate end-to-end data-to-insight workflows, we adapt its analytic tasks, data sources, and the reference data sources to specifically test the data discovery phase. This benchmark presents significant challenges to autonomous agents, demanding cross-table analytical reasoning and navigation of high-cardinality search spaces. Most notably, in the astronomy domain, it contains approximately 1,500 tables. The original data sources are organized as directories of hetero-geneous files (e.g., raw CSVs, spreadsheets, or specialized scientific formats). In order to simulate an enterprise data warehouse envi-ronment, first we transform them into a collection of tables. To achieve this, we recursively traverse the data directories, applying specialized parsers tailored to file types (e.g., parsing fixed-width 

.tle orbital data or inferring headers from .omni2 formats) to extract both the tabular data and associated descriptive text. The extracted tables are then standardized into a schema-aware CSV format, with column names validated for database compatibility. Crucially, unstructured descriptions, whether embedded in file head-ers or located in separate .txt metadata files, are consolidated into user provided table description field. Table 1 summarizes the dataset characteristics, illustrating the scale and complexity of each dataset. 

4.1.2 Synthetically-Scaled BIRD. To systematically stress-test the system’s resilience against the complexities of real-world enter-prise environments, we synthetically created a data lake with many tables that are similar to each other and with different table qual-ities. We started with the BIRD dataset [ 22 ] that was originally designed for Text-to-SQL tasks and provides natural language ques-tions paired with clean database schemas and ground-truth SQL queries. We created two distinct versions of five databases: a clean version containing only the original base tables, and a messy ver-sion that included redundant views, tables that were created from the original ones by vertical and horizontal fragmentation, and tables with inconsistent data quality. Table 2 summarizes the sta-tistical characteristics and scale of both. We utilized 758 original analytical questions associated with BIRD’s five selected databases to evaluate the data selection performance. Zhang et al. 

Table 2: Synthetic BIRD data lake Statistics. "Dup." stands for Duplicates. "Low Q." stands for low quality. 

Base Splits Dup. Low Q. #Tables #Task Superhero 10 17 54 27 108 129 Financial 8 30 76 38 152 106 Student club 8 33 82 41 164 158 Card games 6 47 106 23 182 191 Formula 1 13 39 104 52 208 174 

## 4.2 Synthetic data lake creation 

To simulate the redundancy, fragmentation, and quality degrada-tion typical of enterprise data lakes, we developed a data creation pipeline that applies transformation to the BIRD dataset, yielding a messy, large-scale repository of tables. This expansion was achieved through three primary noise-injection operations: 

Partitioned Tables. We used an LLM to identify logical partition-ing keys (e.g., categorical regions or temporal buckets) and hori-zontally split the base tables into multiple sub-tables. This forces the agent to compute unions of views to retrieve complete enti-ties. For example, horizontally splitting a base card table along a categorical type key yields three sub-tables, card_type_classic ,

card_type_junior and card_type_gold .

Duplicate Tables. We duplicated tables to simulate different data lifecycle stages, creating production, staging, and testing variants. A production table was created as an exact, clean copy of the original table to represent the highly authoritative source. A staging table 

was created by duplicating the base table and injecting noise, either by (1) injecting row-level duplicates by appending a random 10% sample of existing records, or (2) applying a mask that replaces values with NULL at a 5% probability rate. A testing table was created by taking a random 10% row sample subset of the original table. This setup forces the system to reason about data lineage to select the correct view. We consider only the clean ’production’ versions of the tables to be correct. 

Low-quality Tables. We intentionally degraded data integrity by generating tables with broken foreign keys, injected duplicate rows, and missing entities. We broke foreign keys by replacing 10% of the row references with NULL and another 5% of references with an out-of-bounds index (e.g., 99999999) for the identified columns ending with _id to simulate orphan records. We injected duplicate data by randomly sampling 10% of rows and appending them back to the table. We introduced data incompleteness by extracting a 20% random row sample from the original table to generate subsets. To fully track the data creation pipeline, we recorded detailed lineage information for all derived tables. For the partitioned tables, we stored a human-readable explanation of the partition rule (e.g., "Split partition of seasons where year is 1970"), the original source table name, the partition column, and the split data type. These new sub-tables follow a systematic naming convention in the format of 

{source}_{column}_{value} . For the duplicate tables, in addition to appending lifecycle suffixes to table names (i.e., _prod , _stg , and 

_test ), we added table descriptions such as "Clean PROD version", "Sample TEST version", or "Dirty STG version", while preserving a reference to the base. Finally, for the low-quality tables, each variant retained its source table reference alongside a specific degradation description (e.g., "Broke FK columns in {column}", "Injected random NULLs into {table}", "Duplicated rows to {table}", and "A subset of {table}"). These table names were correspondingly labeled with the suffixes _broken_fk , _nulls , _dups , and _subset , respectively. We incorporated this lineage information into the metadata description of each table, making it available to Metadata Reasoner and all other tested methods. 

## 4.3 Baselines 

We compare the Full Metadata Reasoner (MR) against an enter-prise vector-search engine and three ablation variants: 

• Vector Search (Baseline) : This baseline serves as a non-agentic control. First, it utilizes vector embeddings to re-trieve semantically close candidate metadata chunks, apply-ing a 0.7 cosine distance threshold to immediately discard irrelevant results. Finally, a semantic ranker re-orders the candidates to prioritize contextual accuracy. We use this vector-search engine as the semantic search tool for our 

Metadata Reasoner because of its high performance. 

• Pneuma [2]: Pneuma utilizes hybrid full-text and vector search over LLM-generated metadata, followed by an LLM-based judge to re-rank the top-K tables. We implemented it using Gemini-3-Flash, and feeding the same user-provided documentations as for Metadata Reasoner .We use text-embedding-005 for metadata encoding in all methods. All Metadata Reasoner variants utilize Gemini-3-Flash as the backbone model and are implemented using the ADK framework 1.

• MR-Search : This utilizes the discrimination-oriented meta-data for search engine within the agentic workflow. The agent may perform multiple search iterations, but only con-sumes the responses from the search engine. 

• MR-Search+Tools : This leaves out the attached metadata for the retrieved tables in the LLM prompt. It tests the system’s ability to dynamically use on-the-fly metadata for reasoning. 

• MR-Search+Attached : This incorporates the attached table content summarization. But it does not use the tools to fetch on-the-fly metadata. 

• Full MR (MR-Search+Attached+Tools) : The complete archi-tecture that autonomously fetches the exact fragments of metadata. 

## 4.4 Evaluation methods and metrics 

4.4.1 Evaluation with ground truth table sets. Standard rank-based metrics (e.g., Hit@K) are ill-suited for agentic systems that output variable-length sets. We therefore measure selection accuracy be-tween the reference table set 𝑇 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 and the predicted table set 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 

using a set-aware F1-Score , a harmonic mean of precision and recall that captures the two core objectives of our task goal. Specifically, we utilize Recall to evaluate the sufficiency (or coverage) of the selected data sources, and Precision to evaluate their minimality (or conciseness). To ensure a rigorous comparison with ranking-based baselines like vector search, we evaluate their performance across 

> 1ADK:https://google.github.io/adk-docs/ An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning

various retrieval thresholds 𝐾 and report the best achieved F1-score. The metric formulations are as follows: 

• Recall : |𝑇 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 ∩𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ||𝑇 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 | (Measures coverage), 

• Precision : |𝑇 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 ∩𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ||𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 | (Measures conciseness), 

• F1-Score : 2 × 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ×𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 +𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 .We also track the average number of steps, i.e., Average #step ,per task to measure the computational cost and efficiency of the reasoning process. 

4.4.2 Evaluation without ground truth table sets. Evaluating table selection accuracy on the synthetic BIRD dataset is challenging because the derived data lake lacks direct ground-truth reference tables. However, by leveraging our comprehensive lineage tracking, which maps every derived table back to its clean base ancestor, we can use the dataset’s existing gold SQL queries to systematically evaluate table selection performance and bypass the need for man-ual re-labeling. Our evaluation approach has the following three steps: 

1. Parse Gold Query : We extract all base tables and column-value constraints (e.g., from WHERE clauses) from the original Gold SQL. 

2. Trace Lineage : For each selected table, consult the lineage map to identify its clean base ancestor and the specific operations used to generate it (e.g., horizontal splits or noise injections). 

3. Verify Correctness : A returned table is strictly scored as correct only if it satisfies three distinct conditions. First, its associated base ancestor is required by the Gold SQL. Second, it excludes undesir-able quality markers and noise (i.e., _stg , _test , _subset , _dups ,

_broken_fk or _nulls suffixes). Third, if the table is a horizon-tally split partition, its split values perfectly correspond to the filter constraints demanded by the Gold SQL. For example, the selected table district_A3_east_bohemia_prod is correct if the gold SQL contains a matching filter condition WHERE A3 = "East Bohemia" 

on the District table. Based on the correctly verified tables in the selected table set, we calculate the Recall, Precision, and F1 scores for each example. 

## 5 Experimental Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate the Metadata Reasoner across both the real-world KramaBench environment and the synthetically scaled BIRD dataset. We organize our evaluation around five core Research Questions (RQ) to assess the system’s end-to-end accuracy, its impact on downstream analytic tasks, its robustness against structural data messiness common in enterprise environments, the effectiveness of combining attached and on-the-fly metadata, and the optimal metadata descriptions for semantic search. 

## 5.1 RQ1: End-to-end data selection performance 

We first evaluate whether the Metadata Reasoner can effectively identify the accurate combination of data sources. 

5.1.1 Results on KramaBench. As shown in Table 3, the fully config-ured Metadata Reasoner (Full MR) achieves an average F1-score of 83.16% across the six KramaBench domains, substantially out-performing the vector search baseline, which achieves the best F1 score of 50.77% and the LLM-powered hybrid retrieval system, 

Table 3: Average recall, precision, F1, and the number of steps over six KramaBench domains across different methods. "Rec." stands for "Recall" and "Prec." stands for "Precision". Method Rec. (%) Prec. (%) F1 (%) #Steps Vector Search (Tool) - - 50.77 -

Pneuma - - 45.12 -

MR-Search 75.15 ±2.91 79.08 ±2.63 73.43 ±2.59 13.51 ±1.21 

MR-Search+Attached 80.83 ±3.00 84.13 ±3.73 79.66 ±2.80 8.36 ±0.83 

MR-Search+Tools 79.96 ±4.11 79.72 ±3.12 76.65 ±3.43 24.14 ±2.09 

Full MR 84.44 ±2.29 86.63 ±2.65 83.16 ±2.49 10.10 ±1.07 

> Note: Bold values indicate the best performance across all the methods.

Table 4: F1 score (%) comparison across six domains. We re-port the mean scores over five different runs and the corre-sponding standard deviations. The F1 scores for the vector search baseline represent the best F1 scores achieved across various choices of top 𝐾 results. Domain Vector Search Pneu-ma MR-                                          

> Search
> MR-
> Search+ Attached
> MR-
> Search+ Tool
> Full MR
> Astronomy 32.80 27.70 64.38 ±2.96 67.68 ±1.94 70.34 ±2.78 72.31 ±3.72
> Legal 38.45 24.94 63.09 ±2.51 61.27 ±2.75 60.80 ±3.50 64.40 ±1.53
> Environment 45.56 33.93 79.73 ±0.76 85.49 ±1.22 81.77 ±3.24 87.95 ±3.08
> Biomedical 50.37 58.15 74.88 ±5.04 77.63 ±6.31 82.70 ±6.36 87.98 ±3.35
> Wildfire 58.25 42.70 65.93 ±1.05 89.80 ±3.20 69.84 ±2.41 90.21 ±1.91
> Archeology 79.17 83.33 92.59 ±3.20 96.11 ±1.36 94.44 ±2.27 96.11 ±1.36
> Average F1 50.77 45.12 73.43 ±2.59 79.66 ±2.80 76.65 ±3.43 83.16 ±2.49

Pneuma (45.12%). By reasoning over the attached metadata to nar-row the search space before invoking tools, the Metadata Rea-soner achieves this peak F1-score efficiently, with an average of only 10.10 reasoning steps per task. The domain-specific breakdowns, as shown in Table 4, reveal that the performance gap is most significant in high-cardinality en-vironments, i.e., the Astronomy domain (1,498 tables). The Full MR achieves an F1-score of 72.31%, more than doubling the performance of vector search (32.8%) and Pneuma (27.70%). The Metadata Rea-soner maintains robust accuracy across all domains, achieving its highest relative gain in the Wildfire domain comparing differ-ent Metadata Reasoner variants, where the addition of content-driven attached metadata and on-the-fly metadata boosts the F1-score from 65.93% to 90.21%. 

Case Studies In Figure 3, we show an example from the Kram-aBench Legal dataset. This example demonstrates how the Meta-data Reasoner overcomes the retrieval limits of vector-based re-trievers when handling a complex hypothetical task. The ranking-based retriever, relying on vector search (e.g., matching "2007 dis-tribution"), can fail. Revelant tables like 2024_CSN_Report_Count 

(containing 2007 report data) being ranked low (Rank 11) because they focus on "counts" not "distribution". In contrast, the Meta-data Reasoner finds the right tables by 1) breaking the query into computable variables for search (Step 1&2): Variable A: To-tal number of reports in 2007 and Variable B: The percentage of "Auto Related" reports in 2024 ; 2) Using tools (Step 3) to explicitly Zhang et al. 

Figure 3: An example that Metadata Reasoner selects the right tables with low retrieval ranks. The two ground truth tables rank 5 and 11 in the returned list in vector search. The Metadata Reasoner breaks down the complex analytic task (Step 1) into searchable and computable variables for search (Step 2). It then uses tools to verify the data presence (Step 3), ensuring the precise and complete set of tables is selected for the final calculation. Table 5: Comparison of Metadata Reasoner (MR) and Top 10 Vector Search results for the data selection accuracy across five BIRD synthetic datasets (metrics in %). Dataset Version Method Precison Recall F1 score                                                                   

> Superhero Base (10) MR 99.2 98.4 98.8 Messy (108) MR 92.5 91.2 91.2
> Top 10 25.1 66.8 35.2 Financial Base (8) MR 92.8 91.2 90.7 Messy (106) MR 88.4 87.4 86.5
> Top 10 29.7 58.1 37.2 Student Club Base (8) MR 96.3 95.4 95.7 Messy (164) MR 84.9 83.3 83.6
> Top 10 17.7 56.3 25.7 Card Games Base (6) MR 83.5 82.1 82.6 Messy (182) MR 81.9 76.4 78.1
> Top 10 14.7 51.1 21.4 Formula 1 Base (13) MR 95.4 94.3 94.5 Messy (208) MR 89.1 88.2 88.3
> Top 10 20.4 66.9 30.3
> Average
> Base MR 93.4 92.3 92.5 Messy MR 87.4 85.3 85.5
> Top 10 21.5 59.8 30.0

verify data presence before selection, such as confirming the ta-ble 2024_CSN_Report_Count has historical "Year = 2007" data and that 2024_CSN_Report_Categories has the exact category string "Auto Related"; 3) Based on verified data, the Metadata Reasoner 

selects the correct tables to build the specific formula needed: Total 2007 reports × Percentage of 2024 "Auto Related" reports , ensuring the correct data is retrieved and the complex question is fully answered. 

Table 6: The Text-to-SQL execution accuracy (%) on the syn-thetic BIRD data lake. Comparison between Top10 retrieved tables and Metadata Reasoner (MR) selected tables across different datasets. Finan-cial Card games Formu-la 1 Student club Super-hero Avg. Top10 54.72 38.74 57.47 58.86 72.09 56.38             

> MR 64.15 60.21 66.09 79.11 86.82 71.28
> ↑+9.43 +21.47 +8.62 +20.25 +14.73 +14.90

5.1.2 Results on the synthetic dataset. Table 5 presents the end-to-end data selection accuracy on the synthetically scaled BIRD data lake. The Metadata Reasoner demonstrates strong and robust performance in data selection across both clean and messy data environments, outperforming the standard vector search baseline. On the clean base datasets, the method achieves an average F1 score of 92.5%, which holds up remarkably well at 85.5% even when subjected to the complex redundant variants, horizontal partitions, and injected noise of the messy synthetic datasets. In contrast, the baseline vector search (Top-10 retrieval) suffers severe performance degradation in the messy environment, yielding a 30.0% average F1-score driven by low precision and moderate recall. 

## 5.2 RQ2: Performance boost on downstream analytical tasks 

To assess the impact of table selection on downstream analytical accuracy, we conducted an Text-to-SQL experiment across the five synthetic BIRD data lake environments. We compared SQL query execution accuracy using two distinct data selection inputs fed into a simple-prompt SQL generator powered by Gemini-3-Pro: (1) the An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning 

Figure 4: Distribution of selected table types from Metadata Reasoner (MR) and top 10 search results in the synthetic messy data lake (%). Metadata Reasoner successfully se-lected 99.0% of the tables without injected noise. 

top-10 ranked tables returned by vector search, and (2) the set of tables selected by the Metadata Reasoner . Both configurations provided identical metadata signals to the SQL generator, including the same schemas, metadata, the natural language question, and supporting evidence. For the Metadata Reasoner configuration, we further augmented the prompt with the output justification logic. Our results indicate that using the tables produced from Meta-data Reasoner achieved an average execution accuracy of 71.28%, outperforming the results with the top-10 retrieval set, which yielded an average accuracy of 56.38%. The primary failure of the top-10 retrieved tables baseline is that it misses essential entities or attributes. This occurs because the over-retrieval of similar-looking duplicates and low-quality variants for a single target dimension crowds out other required data. 

## 5.3 RQ3: Robustness against data messiness 

To understand why traditional ranking-based retrieval engines fail in complex enterprise environments, we profiled the specific distribution of table types selected by both systems from our noisy synthetic data lake. Figure 4 visualizes the performance comparison across the five BIRD synthetic datasets. Across all datasets, the Metadata Rea-soner ’s selections are almost entirely dominated by the "Table w/o noise" category (colored in dark blue). This confirms that Metadata Reasoner is highly effective at filtering out noise and selecting high-quality tables from a pool of similar looking candidates. On average, 99.0% of the tables selected by the Metadata Reasoner 

were strictly noise-free. The negligible 1.0% error margin primarily consisted of staging tables ( _stg at 0.5%) and subset tables ( _subset 

at 0.4%). Conversely, the vector search baseline retrieved a significantly lower proportion of clean tables, averaging only 64.4%, while allow-ing severe noise contamination (35.6%) into its Top-10 results. The noise was composed of various types, with incomplete data variants, specifically subsets (13.5%) and test splits (10.7%), representing the largest proportion of errors. In conclusion, these findings validate that the Metadata Reasoner is far superior to a vector search retriever in in explicitly reasoning about data quality markers to avoid noisy, corrupted, or incomplete tables. 

## 5.4 RQ4: Ablation of the attached and on-the-fly metadata 

We conducted an ablation study to evaluate the effectiveness of the attached and on-the-fly metadata. 

The performance boost from the attached metadata : The intro-duction of attached table content summarization metadata provides the single most significant boost to both accuracy and efficiency. In Table 3, we can see that adding the attached metadata to the initial agent prompt ( MR-Search → MR-Search+Attached ) improves the F1-score from 73.43% to 79.66% while reducing the average execution steps from 13.51 to 8.36. 

The on-the-fly metadata trade-off : The on-the-fly metadata (via the use of tools like data_finder and joinability_check ) pro-vides the highest overall accuracy. However, as shown in Table 4, the MR-Search+Tool variant, without the warm start provided by at-tached metadata, the agent defaults to exhaustive trial-and-error, with steps nearly tripling to 24.14 (see Table 3) as it attempts to get more metadata signals without sufficient prior context. 

## 5.5 RQ5: Effectiveness of discrimination-oriented search 

Finally, we evaluate the initial stage of our pipeline in isolation to empirically validate our embedding representation strategy. When building the vector index, embedding the raw schema and generic content often causes semantically similar tables to conflate within the vector space, degrading retrieval precision. We compare three distinct metadata preparation methods: 

• Schema only (baseline) : Indexes the raw data structure, consisting of the original table name, schema information (column names and data types), and three randomly sam-pled rows to provide basic value grounding. 

• Table content-summarization : Employs LLM-driven sta-tistical enrichment and schema integration method described in Section 3.5.1. 

• Discrimination-oriented metadata : This method uti-lizes the two-stage description generation pipeline in Sec-tion 3.4.1. Rather than generating descriptions derived from a single table content, this group-aware meta-prompting strategy systematically highlights distinguishing features that differentiate a table from its semantic peers. To ensure a fair comparison, all three metadata representations were encoded with identical text-embedding model and queried via the same underlying search algorithm. We evaluate retrieval accuracy using the Recall@K metric, which measures the system’s ability to find all necessary tables within the top 𝐾 results. As detailed in Table 7, discrimination-oriented metadata con-sistently achieves the highest Recall@5, demonstrating significant advantages in high-cardinality environments. In the Astronomy 

domain (1,498 tables), it outperforms the schema-only baseline at Recall@1 (27.98% vs. 14.85%) and Recall@5 (42.25% vs. 32.58%). It similarly dominates across all thresholds in the Legal domain, where high semantic redundancy is common. These results prove that isolating differentiating variables via two-stage meta-prompting substantially enhances vector separability, an effect that is particu-larly crucial when differentiating structurally identical tables. Zhang et al. 

Table 7: Recall scores (%) across six KramaBench domains with different metadata representations at various 𝐾 retrieval. "Rec@K" represents "Recall@K (%)".                                                           

> Domain Metadata Rec@1 Rec@5 Rec@10
> Astronomy (1498 tables) Schema Only 14.85 32.58 45.71
> Table content 21.50 34.13 34.33 Discrimination 27.98 42.25 43.71 Legal (134 tables) Schema Only 24.44 47.06 51.91 Table content 31.73 52.98 71.89 Discrimination 36.17 64.23 72.40
> Environment (36 tables) Schema Only 23.44 54.89 65.21 Table content 30.29 49.58 59.57 Discrimination 29.29 58.10 65.91
> Biomedical (29 tables) Schema Only 16.67 37.04 51.85 Table content 41.67 55.56 74.07
> Discrimination 31.48 73.15 73.15 Wildfire (21 tables) Schema Only 37.30 74.60 95.24 Table content 51.59 80.16 95.24 Discrimination 51.59 86.51 97.62
> Archeology (5 tables) Schema Only 66.67 100. -Table content 66.67 100. -Discrimination 66.67 100. -
> Note: Bold values indicate the highest performance per domain.

While discrimination-oriented metadata provides broad robust-ness, the table content-driven strategy proves highly effective in specialized, data-dense domains like Biomedical and Environment .Because generating contextualized content representations is vi-tal for capturing high-variance, domain-specific terminology (e.g., chemical compounds), this strategy achieves a peak Recall@1 of 41.67% in the Biomedical domain. In contrast, the schema-only base-line consistently fails to capture sufficient semantic context at low K values. This fundamental failure confirms that column headers alone are excessively generic and fundamentally insufficient to facilitate accurate semantic mapping in complex data landscapes. 

## 5.6 Failure Case Analysis 

To better understand the limitations of Metadata Reasoner ’s ca-pability to select the right data sources, we analyzed 126 failure cases from KramaBench and categorized them into five primary fail-ure modes. These failures highlight the complex challenges agents face when mapping natural language to physical data architectures: 

Missing relation dependencies : The first common failure case occurs when the Metadata Reasoner identifies a primary relation containing some query predicates but fails to recognize that the relation is incomplete without joining dimension tables or lookups. For example, in a Biomedical query asking for the "median number of variants per Mbp for serous tumor samples" , the Metadata Rea-soner correctly identified the clinical metadata table containing the filter and the metric, but failed to retrieve a second required table containing additional cohort definitions. 

Granularity mismatch : The Metadata Reasoner frequently struggled to infer the correct level of data granularity required, often being misled by high-level summary tables that directly match query terms instead of selecting the granular source tables needed to compute the answer. In an Environment domain query asking which Boston Harbor beaches met swimming standards 100% of the time ,the agent incorrectly selected state-wide annual summary tables rather than the specific daily granular data required to evaluate the daily threshold predicate. 

Failure in multi-stage query planning : This failure happens when a multi-stage query requires dependent steps (where step 𝑁 

depends on the output of step 𝑁 − 1), but the agent cannot execute the data-dependent reduction to prune the search space. For exam-ple, to find the exceedance rate of a beach during the summer with the most rainfall , the agent correctly reasoned it first needed to identify the wettest year. However, unable to compute that intermediate answer, it failed to prune the search space and instead retrieved all 22 available annual tables as a fallback. 

Redundant relation selection : In contrast to missing tables, this mode occurs when the Metadata Reasoner includes superfluous relations in its prediction set, violating the principle of minimal sufficiency. The system often introduces redundant bridge tables or catalogs when direct join paths already exist. For instance, when querying if fresh water beaches follow the same trend as rainfall ,the Metadata Reasoner included a specific mapping table to link water quality and rainfall data. However, because the primary water-body-testing tables already contained a shared attribute for a direct equi-join, the bridge table was redundant. 

Incomplete partitioned dataset retrieval : In datasets partitioned by time or geography, the Metadata Reasoner sometimes fails to exhaustively retrieve all physical partitions required to satisfy a logical range predicate. In an Astronomy domain query requiring data for the Swarm-A satellite from September 2 to 29, 2019 , the model’s search strategy was non-exhaustive; it returned a subset of only 19 daily tables instead of the required 28, creating large gaps in the time series. Ultimately, these failure modes demonstrate that to further im-prove Metadata Reasoner in enterprise data lakes, future systems require advanced mechanisms capable of inferring complete join re-lationships, understanding varying data granularities, recognizing direct join shortcuts to avoid redundancy, simulating multi-stage ex-ecution, and effectively selecting a comprehensive set of partitioned datasets. 

## 6 Conclusion and Further Work 

Moving beyond simple retrieval, Metadata Reasoner introduces agentic selection – a framework that automates the discovery of joinable, structurally sound data within complex enterprise ecosys-tems. Future work includes improving performance on more com-plex queries and tasks, adapting the system to encompass unstruc-tured data, and enhancing the system with web search tools to complement private catalogs with public data from the open web. In addition, many enterprises lack high-quality metadata in their catalogs. Hence, an important direction is to develop methods that assist in creating metadata while reducing human labor in doing so. Another highly promising direction is transitioning the Metadata Reasoner from its current tool-use implementation into an intrin-sic agent skill architecture, allowing the agent to load contextual metadata information in sequential stages as needed. An Agentic Approach to Metadata Reasoning 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. 2026. Agent Skills. Claud API Docs (2026). https://platform.claude. com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview [2] Muhammad Imam Luthfi Balaka, David Alexander, Qiming Wang, Yue Gong, Adila Krisnadhi, and Raul Castro Fernandez. 2025. Pneuma: Leveraging llms for tabular data representation and retrieval in an end-to-end system. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 3, 3 (2025), 1–28. [3] Alex Bogatu, Alvaro AA Fernandes, Norman W Paton, and Nikolaos Konstanti-nou. 2020. Dataset discovery in data lakes. In 2020 ieee 36th international confer-ence on data engineering (icde) . IEEE, 709–720. [4] Dan Brickley, Matthew Burgess, and Natasha Noy. 2019. Google dataset search: Building a search engine for datasets in an open web ecosystem. In The world wide web conference . 1365–1375. [5] Adriane Chapman, Elena Simperl, Laura Koesten, George Konstantinidis, Luis-Daniel Ibáñez, Emilia Kacprzak, and Paul Groth. 2020. Dataset search: a survey. 

The VLDB Journal 29, 1 (2020), 251–272. [6] Yeounoh Chung, Gaurav T Kakkar, Yu Gan, Brenton Milne, and Fatma Ozcan. 2025. Is long context all you need? leveraging LLM’s extended context for NL2SQL. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12372 (2025). [7] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al . 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multi-modality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 (2025). [8] Debrup Das, Sam O’ Nuallain, and Razieh Rahimi. 2025. RaDeR: Reasoning-aware Dense Retrieval Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18405 (2025). [9] AnHai Doan, Alon Y. Halevy, and Zachary G. Ives. 2012. Principles of Data Integration . Morgan Kaufmann. http://research.cs.wisc.edu/dibook/ [10] Grace Fan, Jin Wang, Yuliang Li, and Renée J. Miller. 2023. Table Discovery in Data Lakes: State-of-the-art and Future Directions. In Companion of the 2023 International Conference on Management of Data (Seattle, WA, USA) (SIGMOD ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 69–75. doi:10. 1145/3555041.3589409 [11] Grace Fan, Jin Wang, Yuliang Li, Dan Zhang, and Renée J. Miller. 2023. Semantics-Aware Dataset Discovery from Data Lakes with Contextualized Column-Based Representation Learning. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 7 (March 2023), 1726–1739. doi:10.14778/3587136.3587146 [12] Raul Castro Fernandez, Ziawasch Abedjan, Famien Koko, Gina Yuan, Samuel Madden, and Michael Stonebraker. 2018. Aurum: A data discovery system. In 2018 IEEE 34th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, 1001–1012. [13] Yanjie Fu, Dongjie Wang, Wangyang Ying, Xinyuan Wang, Xiangliang Zhang, Huan Liu, and Jian Pei. 2025. Autonomous data agents: A new opportunity for smart data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18710 (2025). [14] Alon Y. Halevy. 2001. Answering queries using views: A survey. VLDB J. 10, 4 (2001), 270–294. doi:10.1007/S007780100054 [15] Madelon Hulsebos, Wenjing Lin, Shreya Shankar, and Aditya Parameswaran. 2024. It took longer than i was expecting: Why is dataset search still so hard?. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Workshop on Human-In-the-Loop Data Analytics . 1–4. [16] Tengjun Jin, Yuxuan Zhu, and Daniel Kang. 2025. Elt-bench: An end-to-end bench-mark for evaluating ai agents on elt pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04808 

(2025). [17] Wojciech Kosiuk, Xingyu Ji, Yeounoh Chung, Fatma Özcan, and Madelon Hulse-bos. 2026. Fine-Grained Table Retrieval Through the Lens of Complex Queries. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07146 (2026). [18] Christos Koutras, George Siachamis, Andra Ionescu, Kyriakos Psarakis, Jerry Brons, Marios Fragkoulis, Christoph Lofi, Angela Bonifati, and Asterios Katsi-fodimos. 2021. Valentine: Evaluating matching techniques for dataset discovery. In 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, 468–479. [19] Christos Koutras, Jiani Zhang, Xiao Qin, Chuan Lei, Vasileios Ioannidis, Christos Faloutsos, George Karypis, and Asterios Katsifodimos. 2025. OmniMatch: Join-ability Discovery in Data Products. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18, 11 (2025), 4588–4601. [20] Eugenie Lai, Gerardo Vitagliano, Ziyu Zhang, Sivaprasad Sudhir, Om Chabra, Anna Zeng, Anton A Zabreyko, Chenning Li, Ferdi Kossmann, Jialin Ding, et al .2025. KramaBench: A Benchmark for AI Systems on Data-to-Insight Pipelines over Data Lakes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06541 (2025). [21] Aristotelis Leventidis, Martin Pekár Christensen, Matteo Lissandrini, Laura Di Rocco, Katja Hose, and Renée J Miller. 2024. A large scale test corpus for se-mantic table search. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 1142–1151. [22] Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al . 2023. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 42330–42357. [23] Zhuoming Li, Yichen Gong, Yelong Shen, and Xing Xie Zhang. 2024. Retrieval Augmented Generation or Long-Context LLMs? A Comprehensive Study and Hybrid Approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11193 (2024). [24] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. In Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , Vol. 12. 157–173. [25] Zhaoyang Liu, Zezheng Lai, Gaojie Zhang, Renjie Zhang, Keqing Chen, Xiao Wang, Yujie Zhu, Shaogang Cao, Jiacheng Chen, Yixiao Ge, et al . 2024. Control-LLM: Augmenting Language Models with Tools by Planning, Customization, and Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .[26] Meixiu Long, Duolin Sun, Dan Yang, Junjie Wang, Yue Shen, Jian Wang, Peng Wei, Jinjie Gu, and Jiahai Wang. 2025. DIVER: A Multi-Stage Approach for Reasoning-intensive Information Retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07995 (2025). [27] Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. 2018. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 42, 4 (2018), 824–836. [28] Fatemeh Nargesian, Erkang Zhu, Ken Q Pu, and Renée J Miller. 2018. Table union search on open data. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11, 7 (2018), 813–825. [29] Norman W. Paton, Jiaoyan Chen, and Zhenyu Wu. 2023. Dataset Discovery and Exploration: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 56, 4, Article 102 (Nov. 2023), 37 pages. doi:10.1145/3626521 [30] Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. 2009. The probabilistic relevance frame-work: BM25 and beyond . Vol. 4. Now Publishers Inc. [31] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Bhardwaj, Naman Goyal, et al . 2023. Toolformer: Lan-guage models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023). [32] Rulin Shao, Rui Qiao, Varsha Kishore, Niklas Muennighoff, Xi Victoria Lin, Daniela Rus, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, Sewon Min, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, et al . 2025. ReasonIR: Training Retrievers for Reasoning Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20595 (2025). [33] Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H. Chi, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large Language Models are Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR. [34] Aditi Singh, Abul Ehtesham, Saket Kumar, and Tala Talaei Khoei. 2025. Agen-tic retrieval-augmented generation: A survey on agentic rag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09136 (2025). [35] Hongjin Su, Howard Yen, Mengzhou Xia, Weijia Shi, Niklas Muennighoff, Han-yu Wang, Haisu Liu, Quan Shi, Zachary S Siegel, Michael Tang, et al. 2024. Bright: A realistic and challenging benchmark for reasoning-intensive retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12883 (2024). [36] Zixin Wei, Yucan Guo, Jinyang Li, Xiaolin Han, Xiaolong Jin, and Chenhao Ma. 2025. Revisiting Task-Oriented Dataset Search in the Era of Large Language Models: Challenges, Benchmark, and Solution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15363 

(2025). [37] Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, et al . 2025. Memagent: Reshaping long-context llm with multi-conv rl-based memory agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02259 (2025). [38] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Yongliang Shen, Kan Ren, Dong-sheng Li, and Deqing Yang. 2025. Easytool: Enhancing llm-based agents with concise tool instruction. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 951–972. [39] Weinan Zhang, Junwei Liao, Ning Li, Kounianhua Du, and Jianghao Lin. 2024. Agentic information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09713 (2024). [40] Erkang Zhu, Dong Deng, Fatemeh Nargesian, and Renée J Miller. 2019. Josie: Overlap set similarity search for finding joinable tables in data lakes. In Proceed-ings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data . 847–864. [41] Yizhang Zhu, Liangwei Wang, Chenyu Yang, Xiaotian Lin, Boyan Li, Wei Zhou, Xinyu Liu, Zhangyang Peng, Tianqi Luo, Yu Li, et al . 2025. A Survey of Data Agents: Emerging Paradigm or Overstated Hype? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23587 

(2025). [42] Yuan Zhuang, Yifei Li, Ling Chen, and Wei Wang. 2024. ToolNet: Connect-ing LLMs with Massive Tools via Graph-based Propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00839 (2024).