Title: 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15970v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 00:24:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 

# Yeounoh Chung, Rushabh Desai, Jian He, Yu Xiao, Thibaud Hottelier, Yves-Laurent Kom Samo, Pushkar Kadilkar, Xianshun Chen, Sam Idicula, Fatma Özcan, Alon Halevy, Yannis Papakonstantinou 

Google Cloud Sunnyvale, USA {yeounoh,rsude,hejia,xiayuo,tbh,komsamo,kpushkar,xianshun,samidicula,fozcan,halevy,yannispap}@google.com 

## Abstract 

Several data warehouse and database providers have recently in-troduced extensions to SQL called AI Queries, enabling users to specify functions and conditions in SQL that are evaluated by LLMs, thereby broadening significantly the kinds of queries one can ex-press over the combination of structured and unstructured data. LLMs offer remarkable semantic reasoning capabilities, making them an essential tool for complex and nuanced queries that blend structured and unstructured data. While extremely powerful, these AI queries can become prohibitively costly when invoked thousands of times. This paper provides an extensive evaluation of a recent AI query approximation approach that enables low cost analytics and data-base applications to benefit from AI queries. The approach delivers >100x cost and latency reduction for the semantic filter (AI.IF) op-erator and also important gains for semantic ranking (AI.RANK). The cost and performance gains come from utilizing cheap and accurate proxy models over embedding vectors. We show that de-spite the massive gains in latency and cost, these proxy models preserve accuracy and occasionally improve accuracy across vari-ous benchmark datasets, including the extended Amazon reviews benchmark that has 10M rows. We present an OLAP-friendly ar-chitecture within Google BigQuery for this approach for purely online (ad hoc) queries, and a low-latency HTAP database-friendly architecture in AlloyDB that could further improve the latency by moving the proxy model training offline. We present techniques that accelerate the proxy model training. 

## 1 Introduction 

The Cost and Latency Challenges of Augmenting SQL with AI Operators. Large Language Models (LLMs) are transforming data analytics by enabling new ways to query both structured and unstructured data, extracting value from unstructured information, and automating semantic insights within data platforms. This trans-formation is evident across both academic research [ 21 , 32 , 36 , 39 ]and major cloud data platforms (e.g., Google BigQuery, AlloyDB, Databricks, and Snowflake [ 10 , 14 , 15 , 42 ]), all of which are integrat-ing LLMs to implement AI semantic operators, like semantic search, content summarization and intent classification. Example 1.1 shows a query with a semantic filter on retail reviews. 

Example 1.1. A query that filters out negative reviews: 

> This paper has been accepted for publication at the 2026 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’26).

SELECT review FROM amazon_polarity.reviews WHERE AI.IF("The review is positive: ", review); 

However, integrating these powerful LLMs but resource-intensive LLM operators into database systems presents significant challenges regarding cost and latency. In large-scale Online Analytical Process-ing (OLAP) databases, the computational cost makes the LLM-based semantic processing economically unfeasible on millions of rows. In Hybrid Transactional Analytical Processing (HTAP) databases, the latency incurred by LLM calls severely restricts practical ap-plications. Existing works on LLM-integration techniques often assume small tables or fail to adequately address the performance and cost implications of applying semantic operations. 

Lightweight Proxy Model for Fast and Cost-Efficient AI Query Engine Prior optimization for AI and semantic query processing focused on predictive row skipping to reduce the number of LLM calls for approximate query processing [ 21 , 32 ] and more execu-tion plan-level optimization techniques, like operator re-ordering or model cascading [ 32 , 36 , 39 ]. Crucially, these efforts often dismissed simpler non-LLM proxy model-based approximation, suggested by UQE [ 9], as underperforming or insufficiently accurate compared to their more advanced techniques [ 32 ]. We argue that this proxy approach deserves a careful revisit. Our core insight is that meet-ing the aggressive performance requirements of large-scale OLAP and ultra-fast HTAP necessitates a more cost-aggresive strategy – one that reserves costly LLM invocations for specific, necessary tasks, allowing the lightweight, non-LLM based proxy to handle the majority of queries with high accuracy. Following the UQE [ 9] strategy, we evaluate lightweight “proxy” models as first-class citizens to deliver a high-quality, cost-effective and ultra-fast AI query engine at scale. Namely, we utilize cheap and accurate ML models over embedding vectors as “proxy” to LLMs. We show that this simple, disregarded approach can be very effective in handling simple semantic queries that can be reduced to classification tasks. Such proxy (classification) models , when used appropriately and in conjunction with LLMs, can dramatically reduce the cost and improve the performance of AI operators for complex semantic data analytics. Unlike existing AI query engines and operator optimization frameworks that prioritize accuracy [ 39 ]or minor cost reductions through algorithmic optimization and model cascading [ 32 , 36 ], our aggressive objective is to minimize unnecessary LLM dependency while preserving quality – and use LLM only if its powerful reasoning capabilities are essential. 

> arXiv:2603.15970v1 [cs.DB] 16 Mar 2026 Chung et al.

Table 1: Latency and cost gains of lightweight proxy models on the query in Example 1.1 using a 10-million row table. Approach Latency Improvement Cost Savings     

> Online Proxy Model 329x 728x Offline Proxy Model 991x 792x

Table 1 illustrates the dramatic latency and cost gains measured against the BigQuery (OLAP) AI query engine with distributed exe-cution for LLM-based AI operators. The proxy model architecture achieves 329x latency improvement and 728x cost savings when de-ployed with proxy models trained online for ad hoc queries, sifting through 10-million row table for semantic filter (AI.IF) operation. With offline pre-trained proxy models it achieves 991x latency im-provement and 792x cost savings, needed for database applications with sub-second latency requirements. While proxy model-based approximations have been explored in prior works [ 9 , 32 ], they have often fallen short, demonstrating sub-optimal performance against complex benchmarks and tasks. For instance, [ 32 ] and similar studies have specifically demonstrated the limitations of AI UDFs and similar proxies [ 9] in maintaining quality when blindly substituting LLMs for all use cases. In fact, when applied to the right problem, even simple and cheap conventional ML models (e.g., embedding-based text classification [ 30 , 44 , 45 ]) can outperform LLM-based AI query semantic operation (Table 2). We are revisiting this strategy, which leverages a non-LLM based lightweight proxy model to circumvent the inherent cost and la-tency issues of LLM-based AI operators. This approach is critical for meeting the performance demands of Google BigQuery (large-scale OLAP) and AlloyDB (high-throughput, low-latency HTAP database) workloads. 

Contributions and Outline. As the main contribution of this paper, we present and evaluate low-latency and cost-efficient AI query engine leveraging lightweight (non-LLM) proxy model ap-proximation. Our approach is built on the observation that many high-frequency semantic operations, such as semantic filter and rank operators, can be reformulated as simple classification prob-lems. We implemented and evaluated a prototype AI query engine for semantic filter and rank operators in Google BigQuery and 

AlloyDB to demonstrate massive latency and cost gains while pre-serving accuracy over various benchmark datasets, including one with 10-million rows. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work thoroughly evaluating the implications and potential of proxy models for AI query analytics in million-row table production settings, as well as for low latency database applications. In Sec-tion 3 we present a case for lightweight (classification) proxy model for efficient AI query engine with a formal definition of “proxy” model. In Section 4, we describe the proxy model approximation process. Namely, we describe the online and offline proxy model training strategies, imbalanced proxy model training techniques, the automatic evaluation of proxy models and the adaptive proxy model selection based on the approximation performance. Note, these proper training techniques account for the success of proxy models in our study and likely account for lukewarm performance and quality in prior studies. In Section 6.1 we further discuss adap-tive proxy model selection. This involves moving beyond a simple choice between one proxy model and the LLM baseline to select-ing from a set of multiple, more sophisticated proxy models – not limited to just simple classification models. We present extensive performance benchmarking results and detailed analysis of the pro-totype systems for semantic filter and rank operators in Section 5. We discuss lessons for future work in Section 6. We conclude in in Section 7 with a summary of our key findings and a discussion of future research directions and open challenges inspired by our results. 

## 2 Related Works 

Universal Query Engine (UQE) [ 9 ] demonstrated the efficacy of using embedding-based sample proxy models for semantic filter-ing, which serves as a key inspiration for our work. UQE also enabled conditional aggregation, which is achieved by employ-ing stratigied sampling methods to select representative samples and then use the LLM to statistically estimate the final aggre-gate results. Other contemporary LLM-centric semantic query sys-tems [ 11 , 21 , 32 , 33 , 36 , 39 ] focus on optimizing the LLM execution plan. Their core strategies are designed to reduce the number of costly LLM calls through techniques like predictive row skipping, operator re-ordering, and model cascading (substituting in smaller LLMs; [ 21 , 32 , 48 ] also provide accuracy guarantees for the sample or model cascading based approximation). These works consider the simple non-LLM proxy machine learning model approximation (e.g., ML UDFs and UQE [ 9]) as a baseline for comparative study, demonstrating that it lacks the desired accuracy compared to their methods. This skepticism overlooks the unique potential of the proxy approach when applied aggressively and selectively, particu-larly in scenarios demanding high throughput and low latency. In contrast, the core objective of our work is to analyze and demonstrate the feasibility of more aggressive LLM substitution for high-volume semantic operators (semantic filtering and rank-ing). Instead of focusing on reducing the number of LLM calls or substituting smaller LLMs, our approach introduces a lightweight proxy that directly replace the LLM invocations – we fall back to LLM only when the proxy model’s approximation falls below a predetermined threshold. This substitution allows the system to efficiently process the entire table (not just a sample, unlike other systems) and bypasses the computational and cost bottlenecks of LLM inference entirely. Our extensive evaluation is specifically designed to prove that this proxy model approach is a highly viable, cost-efficient, and performant alternative that eliminates the LLM inference cost entirely for core analytic operations. Our method is designed to be orders of magnitude faster and cheaper by entirely substituting the LLM inference step with a proxy model. 

## 3 A Case for Lightweight Proxy Model For Efficient AI Query Engine 

Current AI operator optimization efforts largely concentrate on model cascading or cost-efficient algorithmic improvements of LLM-based implementations [ 23 , 32 , 33 , 39 , 49 ]. While these advance-ments are valuable, they primarily enhance individual semantic operation efficiency and often overlook the potential of non-LLM 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 

Table 2: Proxy models (Embedding + Logistic Regression) VS. LLM-based baseline performance and normalized latency improvement against the LLM baseline for AI.IF using Kaggle SPAM email classification dataset. Metric / Data Size Offline Proxy Online Proxy LLM 

Accuracy 1115 0.99 0.98 0.96 Latency ↑ 1115 634x 5.4x 1x 100K 632x 294x 1x 

alternatives. Table 2 demonstrates that, in certain scenarios, proxy models can achieve comparable, or even better results at a signifi-cantly lower cost (no LLM calls) and latency. It is interesting to see that proxy models can sometimes achieve better accuracy results, and we discuss this further in Section 5.2. We trained simple proxy models from NLP text classification tutorials [ 30 , 44 , 45 ], such as text embedding-based Logistic Re-gression (LR) classifier, with 200 training examples labeled with 

gemini-2.5 . We compare the proxy models prepared offline and on-line , where online means that the sampling, labelling and training of the proxy model are performed within the execution context of the AI query. Offline proxy models are crucial for database applications with sub-second latency requirements, and the online proxy model training [ 9] is invaluable for ad hoc analytical queries. The offline training uses train data split, and online training happens directly with evaluation with the test data split (1115 email texts). The proxy models and the LLM baseline both score above 90% accuracy, and the proxy models yield slightly superior accuracy, 97%, for this particular dataset 1.We also replicate the orginal dataset to construct a larger dataset to highlight the latency gain at scale, up to 100K rows as shown in Table 2. The proxy models are orders of magnitude faster than the LLM baseline. While the offline latency reduction is massive due to the proxy model being pre-trained, this gain remains static across different table sizes. This is because both the proxy model’s prediction time and the LLM’s inference time both grow propor-tionally to the data sizes. For the online use case, the latency gain is further amplified by increasing table size, as the overhead of sampling, labeling, and training can be amortized over processing a larger dataset. We implement a prototype AI query engine leveraging light-weight proxy models. This framework focuses on applying proxy model-based approximation to dramatically imporve the latency and the cost of AI query and calls LLMs selectively when the quality of approximation falls short. We formally define a proxy model as follows: 

Definition 3.1. Let M be a complex model (e.g., an LLM, 𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 )that maps an input 𝑥 ∈ X to an output 𝑦 ∈ Y , such that 𝑦 = 𝑀 (𝑥 ).A proxy model 𝑀 𝑃 is a simpler model that maps 𝑥 ∈ X to an output 

𝑦 𝑃 ∈ Y , such that 𝑦 𝑃 = 𝑀 𝑃 (𝑥 ) and 𝑀 𝑃 (𝑥 ) ≈ 𝑀 (𝑥 ) for a relevant subset of X. The objective of 𝑀 𝑃 is to approximate the behavior of the complex model, like 𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 for a specific task or query. 

> 1https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jackksoncsie/spam-email-dataset

We posit that proxy models can bring about massive latency and cost gains without compromising the quailty, when used for the right problems. In Section 5 we present extensive evaluation results demonstrating these advantages for semantic filtering and ranking. 

## 4 Lightweight Proxy Approximation 

The core contribution of our approach is the demonstration that sim-ple, automated techniques are sufficient to efficiently approximate LLMs for high-frequency semantic operators without requiring manual expert intervention. We highlight the following architec-tural principles: 

Fully Automated Workflow: Every incoming semantic operator is treated as a candidate for proxy model training. The system auto-matically parses each operator into its core components, as depicted in Figure 1 – the operator type ( 𝑂 ), the semantic query or the AI operator prompt ( 𝑄 ), and the unstructured column reference ( 𝐶 ) – before initiating the proxy model approximation process. All stages of the pipeline, including embedding generation, data sampling, LLM labeling, and model fitting, are fully automated. This process is identical for both online (ad hoc) and offline (pre-trained) settings, ensuring that the training costs for a given table size remain fixed across workloads. 

Elimination of Expert ML Intervention: Our methodology ex-plicitly avoids the need for specialized ML expertise or manual hyperparameter tuning. The system utilizes standard "off-the-shelf" models, primarily embedding-based Logistic Regression (LR). We utilize a single set of default parameters ( sklearn default for Lo-gistic Regression, except class_weight=“balanced” ) for all datasets and queries. As demonstrated in our ablation study (Section 5.7), expensive hyperparameter searches yield negligible benefits over default settings when utilizing high-quality embeddings. The sys-tem automatically monitors proxy accuracy against LLM labels during training. It employs an “Adaptive Proxy Model Selection” mechanism that only deploys the proxy if its performance is within a specific quality threshold ( 𝜏 ) of the LLM baseline; otherwise, it automatically falls back to the LLM baseline. 

## 4.1 Online and Offline Proxy Model Training 

The training process typically begins with the generation of embed-dings using an embedding model to compute representations for the unstructured data (e.g., text), potentially leveraging pre-computed embeddings if available from previous runs or provided by users. A following sampling step then efficiently selects a small, repre-sentative subset of rows from the large table/dataset. Subsequently, the LLM is invoked for labeling on this sampled data, only provid-ing ground truth labels for training the proxy model. By limiting LLM calls to a small sample, the overall cost and latency are signifi-cantly reduced compared to full-dataset LLM invocation. Beyond classification, embedding vectors also provide a strong baseline for ranking operations; for instance, LOTUS [ 32 ] utilizes embedding-based similarity to facilitate semantic JOIN optimization. Leveraging proxy models for processing AI queries necessitates effective strategies for their training, which can be broadly catego-rized into offline and online approaches. 

Online Training: For BigQuery , a large-scale OLAP cloud database, we employ online training designed for new incoming semantic Chung et al. 

queries. The high cost of this online proxy model training is effec-tively amortized across the massive query processing of millions or billions of rows. The proxy model is dynamically trained during query execution, an approach inspired by the active learning and dynamic techniques used in UQE[9] for semantic filtering. 

Offline Training: The primary motivation for offline proxy model training in AlloyDB , a high-performance HTAP database is to ensure low latency for AI queries, especially for interactive database appli-cations. For offline training, proxy models are prepared for known or frequently re-occurring semantic tasks and queries. By perform-ing the training process offline, we can decouple the overhead of proxy model training entirely from the online query execution path. One major advantage of offline training is that you can scale the test-time compute [ 28 , 41 ] to improve the LLM labeling accuracy (e.g., extra thinking and verification), that are too costly and time consuming for online labeling. This decoupled environment also provides the time and resources for systematic model optimization. We can perform more extensive proxy model selection and hyperpa-rameter tuning, to ensure the proxy model is accurate and efficient for known workload patterns before deployment. While highly effective, the offline-trained proxy models also introduce specific model robustness challenges. In particular, we need to ensure that the trained model remains valid and performs well, even as the data changes. This requires periodic retraining on the latest data to avoid performance degradation. Similarly, there is a question about the robustness of a proxy model trained on a sample of the entire table when applied to specific data slices based on filters. This is an important consideration that needs to be carefully monitored and verified to derive the best sample size and sampling strategy for offline training. It is also worth noting that for simpler text classification prob-lems, high-quality embedding generation can sometimes be skipped in favor of using a basic word frequency-based classifier, as demon-strated in Table 2. However, our focus remains on leveraging gen-erally applicable text embedding models due to their robustness and broad applicability across diverse tasks. Furthermore, the pro-posed proxy model approximation easily extends to non-textual data embeddings generated with various and multimodal embed-ding models [24]. 

## 4.2 Imbalanced Label Training 

The core challenge in training an effective proxy model is the imbal-anced label distribution and sourcing sufficient relevant examples from a large table. Label imbalance is a major impediment to model quality and is difficult to completely mitigate with sampling alone. There are many techniques to mitigate the problem [ 12 ]. Namely, these methods include downsampling (reducing the majority class), bootstrapping (resampling of the minority class with replacement), weighted training (assigning higher loss weights to minority class examples, inversely proportional to class frequencies in the training sample.), and synthetic minority class data generation techniques like, SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique [3]). Based on some performance and cost analysis, we establish that simple weighted training 2 provides the most stable, cost-efficient      

> 2We use sklearn [34 ] Logistic Regression implementation in our prototype pipeline, with class_weight = “balanced” for weighted training.

solution, and is the default choice unless there is an insufficient number of minority examples. For all other hyperparameters, we use the default (e.g., L2-Regularization), since tuning does not result in significant differences as discussed in Section 5.7. If there are not enough minority class examples to support proxy model training, then we apply more costly oversampling (SMOTE) technique. In Section 5.5, we discuss our experimental results, com-paring the performance of the various standard imbalanced tech-niques across various imbalance ratios to validate our heuristics. 

## 4.3 Automatic Proxy Model Evaluation 

The query engine will automatically evaluate the selected proxy models on a fixed sample from the target dataset. For online training, we label the sample with LLM for training and evaluate the perfor-mances of the proxy models on the training sample. If the results do not meet the desired thresholds, as described in Definition 4.1, then we fall back to the LLM baseline – continue predicting for the rest of the table beyond the initial sample. For offline training, we can also use pre-curated test datasets, labeled by LLMs offline, to evaluate the trained proxy models for known workloads. 

## 4.4 Adaptive Proxy Model Selection 

Table 2 illustrates the potential of simple proxy models performing comparably with the expensive LLM-based baseline operators. In general, proxy model (also smaller LLMs) substitution for LLM in AI operators requires careful consideration and accuracy guarantees and/or validation as it can compromise quality [ 32 , 33 , 39 ]. Our ap-proach is to intelligently deploy offline/online proxy models when applicable and fall back to the LLM-based baselines. Namely, we select the proxy if the proxy prediction accuracy is close to the LLM baseline (e.g., 𝜏 =0.1, difference is less than absolute 10% drop from the baseline). We can compute and monitor the proxy accuracy during training using the LLM labels as ground truth. This adaptive proxy model selection strategy allows us to dynamically balance quality requirements with performance and cost constraints, ensur-ing the delivery of high-quality semantic insights while operating efficiently for the large-scale analytical workloads. The problem of adaptive proxy model selection can be formally defined as follows: 

Definition 4.1. Given an incoming AI query 𝐴 , we extract a set of AI operators O = {𝑂 1, 𝑂 2, . . . , 𝑂 𝑚 } (e.g., semantic filter). 𝐴 also contains the semantic queries Q = {𝑄 1, 𝑄 2, . . . , 𝑄 𝑚 } and the un-structured data column references C = {𝐶 1, 𝐶 2, . . . , 𝐶 𝑚 }, used as input to the corresponding AI operators. The problem of adap-tive model selection is to define a function S( 𝑂 𝑗 , 𝑄 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑙 ) → 𝑀 𝑝 ,where S is an adaptive selection mechanism that, for any given operator 𝑂 𝑗 , query 𝑄 𝑖 , and dataset 𝐶 𝑙 , selects an optimal model 

𝑀 𝑝 ∈ M , where M = {𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 , 𝑀 𝑃 1 , 𝑀 𝑃 2 , . . . , 𝑀 𝑃 𝑛 }, and 𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 is the full-fidelity, high-cost LLM-based baseline, and 𝑀 𝑃 1 , . . . , 𝑀 𝑃 𝑛 

are various lightweight proxy models. 𝑀 can include both offline and online trainable proxy models. 𝑀 𝑝 meets the operator specific quality constraint: |𝜏 (𝑀 𝑝 |𝑂 𝑗 , 𝑄 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑙 ) − 𝜏 (𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 |𝑂 𝑗 , 𝑄 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑙 )| ≤ 𝑡 for some relevant samples from 𝐶 and an expected quality level 𝜏 for the given operator. If no such 𝑀 𝑝 ∈ M exists, then the operator is served by 𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 .This definition underpins our approach to adaptive proxy model selection, as depicted in Figure 1. We adopt a hierarchical strategy to 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models SELECT * FROM support_transcripts s WHERE AI.IF (”Customer issue is resolved and customer is satisfied in this call: {s.transcript}”) ORDER BY AI.RANK (”Quality of support provided by agent in this call: {s.transcript}”) LIMIT 10 

AI query AI Query Parser          

> O1:AI.IF
> Q1: “ Customer issue is resolved and customer is satisfied in this call: {s.transcript}”
> C1:support_transcripts s →s.transcript
> O2:AI.RANK
> Q2:“Quality of support provided by agent in this call {s.transcript}”
> C2:support_transcripts s, s.transcript

AI.IF 

AI.RANK 

> Automatic Online Model Evaluation

# . . . 

> Adaptive Proxy Model Selection

AI.IF execution strategy 

> Proxy Model Training
> Embedding Generation
> Training Data Sampling & Labeling (by LLM)
> LR training with embedding and LLM labels

τ(M LLM )

> LLM score

τ(M P )

> Proxy score

|τ(M LLM ) - τ(M P )| ≤ t 

M PProxy 

LLM fallback 

Yes No 

Figure 1: AI query execution plan construction with proxy model approximation process. We parse the AI query and extract semantic operators ( 𝑂 𝑖 ) along with the semantic queries/prompts ( 𝑄 𝑖 ), unstructured data columns ( 𝐶 𝑖 ). We apply proxy model approximation for each operator. Proxy models can be trained online with best known or default configurations, or prepared offline for known query patterns depending on the analytics database architectures (OLAP or HTAP). Adaptive proxy model selection between the proxy and LLM, based on automatic online model evaluation results, allows us to choose a cost-efficient and accurate execution strategy. 

apply this adaptive selection for each semantic operator. First, given an incoming AI query 𝐴 , our system begins by extracting a set of discrete AI operators (e.g., semantic filter, rank). This decomposition allows us to manage the complexity of multi-operator queries by breaking them down into simpler, actionable components. For each identified operator, we then implement the selection function S. This function dynamically chooses between 𝑀 𝑃 (Proxy) and 𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 

(LLM) based on the online proxy model evaluation results (e.g., proxy model accuracy over the train sample or any pre-curated test dataset) to deploy the proxy approximation or fall back to LLM-based baseline implementation. 

## 5 Detailed Analysis of Proxy Approximation 

The proxy approximation is rigorously evaluated across a wide variety of prompts, questions, and datasets to demonstrate its ef-fectiveness and cost-efficiency. Our prototype AI query engine is implemented on two distinct cloud analytics database platforms (BigQuery and AlloyDB ). The BigQuery OLAP architecture uses online proxy model training for large-scale online analytics queries. The AlloyDB HTAP architecture uses offline trained proxy models for known queries and its ultra fast latency requirements. AI opera-tors are implemented in the AI query engines as SQL functions and consume table data (transanctionally consistent in HTAP system) as input (just like any other SQL function). We evaluate the performance and cost-effectiveness of using proxy models to approximate the semantic filter (AI.IF) and seman-tic rank (AI.RANK) operators. For individual micro-benchmarks and experiments in this study, we focus primarily on the AI.IF operator results. This is because, in the context of proxy approxima-tion, the semantic ranking operator also reduces to a classification task based on the input column embeddings – identical to the case for AI.IF. This means that we can deduce the same approximation success and failure conditions for both operators. We analyze the proxy’s performance across diverse domains, explicitly detailing the conditions under which it succeeds and fails using the benchmark datasets from Table 3 and 4. 

## 5.1 Evaluation Setup 

System Implementation and Methodology. The choice of Google 

BigQuery and AlloyDB cloud databases is strategic, designed to cover fundamentally different analytical paradigms. BigQuery is used for online analytics and leverages massive parallelism for high-throughput, which opens the door to online model training (the extra overhead from sampling, labelling, and training is incurred during query execution). In contrast, AlloyDB targets queries with strict latency requirements, where models are prepared offline for known query patterns. This distinction allows us to isolate the impact of the model preparation methodology. To focus on a more comprehensive scenario, involving the proxy model training pro-cess, we primarily report results from BigQuery (OLAP), providing a latency breakdown and model performance metrics that explicitly account for the overhead of the necessary online training. AlloyDB 

(HTAP) removes this training process offline for known queries and workload patterns, effectively removing the overhead from the execution critical path. We also report separate normalized latency Chung et al. 

Table 3: Classification benchmark datasets for AI.IF. For the evaluation of the semantic filter (AI.IF), datasets with multiple categories/labels (Relevancy > Binary) are used to pose a one-vs-rest semantic query (e.g., matching one specific category against all others). Dataset Task Domain Relevancy Table (rows) Imbalance Ratio 1 Example Prompt 

California Housing [31] Text Housing Binary 20K 6.71 Location in Latitude & Longitude is near the ocean. 

Amazon Reviews 10k [53] Text eCommerce Binary 10K 4.69 Reviews describe at least one issue with the context of the problem. 

BBC News [18] Topic News 5 categories 2.2K 1.32 Classify new article into follow-ing categories (business / enter-tainment / politics / sport / tech) 

IMDB Movie Reviews [ 26 ] Sentiment Movies Binary 99K 1.10 Movie review is positive. 

Amazon Polarity [53] Sentiment eCommerce Binary 400K 1.00 Review is positive. 

Mental Health [20] Sentiment Health Binary 51.6K 3.41 Mental health is anxiety. 

Tweet Sentiment [22] Sentiment SNS Binary 31K 2.21 Does the following tweet represent positive sentiment? 

Emotion [37] Emotion SNS 6 categories 16K 9.37 Can you determine if the emotion expressed in the following state-ment can be categorized as fear? 

Banking77 [2] Intent Finance 77 categories 13K 3.03 What is the intent of the following banking query? Only return a sin-gle intent from the following table, by the CODE (number). 

Toxic Conversations [51] Text SNS Binary 52K 11.61 The conversation is toxic. 

FEVER [47] Fact Wikipedia Ternary 6.6K 1.00 Is the claim supported by the text?  

> 1Imbalance ratio is defined as the ratio of the number of instances in the majority class to the number of instances in the minority class.

Table 4: Information Retrieval (IR) benchmark datasets for AI.RANK. These datasets are designed to test the performance of relevant document retrieval and are typically characterized by heavy class imbalance, where only a handful of relevant documents exist per query within corpora that can contain hundreds of thousands or even millions of documents. Dataset Task Domain Relevancy Queries Documents Relevant Docs/Query 

TREC-COVID [35] Bio-medical IR Bio-medical 3-level 50 171K 493.5 TREC-DL-2022 [8] Ranking/IR Misc. 4-level 500 369K 189.3 FIQA-2018 [27] Bio-medical IR Bio-medical Binary 648 57K 2.6 SCIDOCS [7] Argument retrieval Misc. Binary 1000 25K 4.9 SciFact [50] Fact checking Scientific Binary 300 5K 1.1 HellaSwag 1 [52] Commonsense reasoning Daily life Binary 200 800 1.0  

> 1The task is to find the most commonsensical ending from four plausible-sounding choices for each claim (context). We sample 200 test claims for evaluation, the corpus consists of all possible endings from all the claims. The task is to rank and/or identify the most probable ending among those.

gains from BigQuery and AlloyDB highlighting some key system architecture differences in Section 5.2. In our production engine implementation, while the execution of the sampling, labeling, and prediction steps is distributed, we opted to execute the training step for the logistic regression seri-ally to minimize communication and scheduling overheads. For proxy model training, we primarily utilize the Gecko embedding model ( text-embedding-005 ) [ 25 ] to compute the embeddings of the unstructured text data columns and semantic queries, except when we study the impact of various embedding models and di-mensionality in Section 5.6. All proxy model training and inference were executed solely on standard vCPUs (e.g., 8 vCPU, 16 GB RAM instances), and we did not use HW accelerators (e.g., GPUs). This design choice validates our core claim: the proxy models are suf-ficiently lightweight to deliver high performance on commodity hardware without requiring expensive HW acceleration. 

Baselines: Our primary baseline for evaluating the performance and cost-effectiveness of the proxy approximation is a pure Large Language Model (LLM) execution of the same semantic operators, specifically utilizing the one of the most capable LLM family (e.g., Gemini [ 17 ]) 3. This pure LLM based baseline is deemed to be the most accurate and also the most expensive baseline that other contemporary LLM-centric semantic query systems try to opti-mize [21, 32, 36, 39]. 

> 3We use Gemini LLM (2.5-Flash) for the evaluation; however, our approach is funda-mentally LLM-agnostic as we examine the feasibility of substituting LLM baseddis-criminative semantic task (filter and rank) with non-LLM based ML classifier. 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models

Recent AI query optimization techniques employs predictive row skipping, filter re-ordering and/or model cascading to reduce the expensive LLM calls. As our focus is to evaluate proxy model and the possibility of processing the entire table with millions of rows, we do not compare directly with other optimization techniques. For a reference, [ 32 ] sampled queries and corpus documents (search space) to below 1K rows “to control for our API spending budget” in their evaluations. 

Datasets. For semantic filtering (AI.IF), we implement a binary clas-sifier using logistic regression proxy. These models are evaluated using the Classification benchmark datasets ( Table 3 ). For semantic ranking (AI.RANK), we consider both the logistic regression proxy and the state-of-the-art cross-attention re-ranker to provide high-quality ranking results with low latency and cost. These models are evaluated using the Information Retrieval (IR) benchmark datasets (Table 4). 

## 5.2 Fast Semantic Filtering 

In terms of quality, we obtain high F1 scores 4 across the various benchmark datasets as presented in Table 5. To test AI.IF semantic filtering query over benchmark datasets with multiple label classes, we pose a binary classification query per label and take the average of per label F1-score as macro F1-score. It is important to note that the proxy approximation yields very high (near perfect) relative accuracy (the ratio between macro F1 Proxy and macro F1 LLM), indicating that the proxy model predictions can closely match the LLM; in some cases (e.g., Amazon Reviews 10k, BBC News, Mental Health, Toxic Conversation) the proxy approximation performs slightly better (relative accuracy ≥ 1.0), since the simple and low-complexity LR decision function can act as a regularizer on top of embeddings. Given that the proxy model learns and approximates the LLM predictions, the approximation also fails when the LLM predictions are inaccurate – for very difficult semantic filtering queries. On the FEVER dataset, our proxy approach achieves a 0.917 relative accuracy compared to the LLM baseline while processing the entire 6.6k claim set – the inference takes just a few seconds, and the training pipeline, including 1,000-sample sampling, labeling, and model fitting takes less than a minute with a scale-out system. In contrast, plan-optimization frameworks like LOTUS [ 32 ] report significantly higher latencies (e.g., ∼190s per 1,000 claims). While hardware variations preclude a direct comparison, these results highlight the distinct cost-efficiency of proxy substitution. Unlike LOTUS and DocETL [ 39 ], which focus on optimizing execution plans and reducing redundant LLM calls, our approach aims to eliminate LLM inference costs much more aggressively for high-frequency operations. These strategies are orthogonal; integrating proxy-based approximation into plan-optimized architectures could yield synergistic reductions in both cost and latency. In terms of scalability and costs, we obtain orders of magnitude speed-ups and cost savings over our pure LLM baseline with pre-computed embeddings (Table 6). With proxy-models, AI Queries become practical in OLAP workloads that are typical of databases like BigQuery . The latency gain scales superlinearly as larger tables 

> 4F1-score is defined as harmonic mean of precision and recall. F1-score is a better metric than mere accuracy since many of the datasets are highly imbalanced.

(more rows) gives more opportunity for BigQuery to parallelize execution. Even with proxy models, the costs are primarily driven by LLM invocation in the labeling step. Since the number of sam-ples to label is independent of the input table size, the reduction in cost also scales superlinearly with the input rows. Our results also show that a pure online version (On-The-Fly Embedding) of proxy models is worthwhile for OLAP workloads. When we generate embeddings on-the-fly for each query (with no reuse or amortiza-tion of embedding generation), we achieve 5x speed-up and 2.5x reduction in cost. The 2.5x reduction in cost remain constant for all data sizes because it reflects the fact that embedding generation is roughly a third of the cost of LLM inference. (This is not a per-fect comparison as embedding generation is charged per character, while LLM inference is per token). Our AlloyDB HTAP architecture with offline proxy model train-ing is designed for latency-sensitive database applications. It uses pre-trained offline proxy models prepared for known workload patterns and with a fixed number of workers in a single database VM instance to ensure high latency and throughput gain even for smaller table sizes. The latency gain against the LLM baseline is constant across different table sizes, as shown in Table 7. The fixed gain is driven by the stark difference in the LLM and proxy model inference times and the fixed number of parallel workers, which is also configurable; the processing time for both the LLM baseline and the offline proxy are linear in the size of table. Figure 2 shows the relative time spent in each step. The cost of model training is insignificant even at small data size. The small relative cost of sampling and training points to the possibility of applying the proxy model optimization eagerly and falling back dynamically on LLM evaluation after evaluating the proxy model accuracy. That is, the sunk cost of such a fallback consists only of the sampling and training steps because the labels used for training can be reused. The overhead of the futile proxy model training is mostly sampling which is kept at 25%; this overhead can be further reduced with more parallel workers. 

Figure 2: Relative wall-clock time of each step of the proxy model optimization with pre-computed embeddings. Only the sampling and prediction steps scale with the input rela-tion size. The fraction of time spent doing prediction does not increase between 1m and 10m rows because BigQuery is able to use more parallelism as the amount of data increases. Chung et al. 

Table 5: Macro F1 and relative accuracy of the proxy vs. LLM baseline for semantic filtering. For multi-label datasets, results are averaged over one-vs-rest binary classification tasks. 

Dataset Labels Per-label Prompt (Binary) Macro F1 Proxy Macro F1 LLM Relative Acc. 1

California Housing 1 Location in Latitude & Longitude belongs to Southern California. 0.953 0.953 1.000 

California Housing 1 Location in Latitude & Longitude is near the ocean. 0.344 0.354 0.971 

Amazon Reviews 10k 2 Review is {sentiment label} 0.860 0.739 1.163 

BBC News 5 News Content describes news in {news topic label} sector 0.830 0.823 1.008 

IMDB Movie Reviews 2 Movie review is {sentiment label} 0.940 0.950 0.989 

Amazon Polarity 2 Review is {sentiment label} 0.965 0.959 1.005 

Mental Health 1 Mental health described by the patient relates to anxiety or stress: 0.214 0.230 0.931 

Mental Health 1 Mental health is normal 0.357 0.349 1.022 

Tweet Sentiment 2 Does the following tweet represent {sentiment label} sentiment? 0.880 0.890 0.989 

Emotion Classification 6 Can emotion described can classify as {emotion label} emotion? 0.428 0.475 0.901 

Toxic Conversations 2 The conversation is toxic. 0.653 0.648 1.006 

Banking77 77 Is intent {intent label}? Think step-by-step: {CoT instructions}. 0.700 0.707 0.990 

FEVER 22 Is the claim supported by the text? 0.782 0.853 0.917   

> 1Relative accuracy is the ratio between Proxy and LLM Macro F1 scores[cite: 845].
> 2We follow [32] and [4] by merging “Refuted” and “NotEnoughInfo” into a single “Not Supported” category.

Table 6: Cost and latency improvement of online proxy model approximation VS. the LLM baseline, with (On-the-Fly) and without (Pre-Computed) embeddings, tested using Amazon Polarity. On-The-Fly Pre-Computed Table Size Cost ↑ Latency ↑ Cost ↑ Latency ↑

10,000 2x 1.3x 9x 1.6x 100,000 2.5x 3x 81x 6x 1,000,000 2.5x 5x 422x 30x 10,000,000 2.5x 5x 728x 320x Table 7: Cost and latency improvement of offline proxy model approximation VS. the LLM baseline, tested using Amazon Polarity. Offline training includes the same process-ing (vCPU), labeling and embedding costs as in Table 6 per the same train sample size. Table Size Cost ↑ Latency ↑

10,000 9x 

111x 

100,000 81x 1,000,000 422x 10,000,000 728x 

## 5.3 Fast Semantic Ranking 

For general ranking tasks, the state-of-the-art cross-attention re-ranker on Vertex AI [ 1] offers high-quality semantic ranking with very low latency based on embedding vectors. However, as ranking queries become more complex (e.g., rubric-based), nuanced LLM-based ranking algorithms may outperform the re-ranker model [ 32 ,40 , 43 ]. To reduce dependence on expensive LLMs for the more challenging rubric-based ranking tasks without sacrificing ranking quality, we explore applying the proxy approach based on embed-dings and simple classification algorithms. To enable aggressive cost savings for semantic ranking, we refor-mulate the task as a classification problem. Traditional Information Retrieval (IR) simplifies it to a binary classification of relevant vs. irrelevant. For rubric-based ranking, the scoring rubrics/guidelines (e.g., 4-level rubric in TREC-DL-2022) provide granular classifica-tion labels. The adaptive proxy model selection mechanism then chooses an LLM-based ranking only when the quality constraint is not met: |𝜏 (𝑀 𝑝 |𝑂 𝑗 , 𝑄 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑙 ) − 𝜏 (𝑀 𝐿𝐿𝑀 |𝑂 𝑗 , 𝑄 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑙 )| ≤ 𝑡 (Definition 4.1). Figure 3 illustrates that we can train an effective proxy model us-ing embeddings and multi-label classifier for rubric-based ranking (TREC-DL-2022 [ 8 ]), and then Adaptive Proxy can choose between the LLM baseline and the online proxy model. The ranking perfor-mance is measured by normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain at rank 10 (nDCG@10). nDCG@10 measures the quality of the top 10 results by considering both the relevance of each item and its position in the ranked list. 

Table 8: Semantic ranking performance (nDCG@10) on the IR benchmark datasets from Table 4. We report the average nDCG@10 over all queries ( ± 1-std). TREC-DL-2022 ranks items by 4-level scoring rubric, for which LLM and its Proxy perform better than Re-Ranker. Re-Ranker LLM Proxy 

FIQA-2018 0.432 (± 0.363) 0.0703 ( ± 0.107) 0.0304 ( ± 0.027) SciFact 0.746 (± 0.368) 0.508 ( ± 0.416) 0.0098 ( ± 0.009) SCIDOCS 0.251 (± 0.267) 0.107 ( ± 0.151) 0.0185 ( ± 0.0469) TREC-DL-2022 0.419 ( ± 0.245) 0.537 (± 0.164) 0.446 ( ± 0.241) TREC-COVID 0.738 (± 0.232) 0.551 ( ± 0.167) 0.535 ( ± 0.215) HellaSwag 0.617 (± 0.252) 0.247 ( ± 0.306) 0.134 ( ± 0.251) 

Table 8 summarizes the retrieval and re-ranking performances using the state-of-the-art cross-attention re-ranker [ 1] (Re-Ranker), the LLM-based semantic ranking (LLM) and its simple logistic 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 

> Number of Labeled Samples (Budget)
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> nDCG@10
> LLM
> Re-Ranker
> Proxy
> Adaptive Proxy

Figure 3: Proxy model performance (nDCG@10 on online training sample) for rubric-based ranking on TREC-DL-2022. The online Proxy performs better after labeling >120 samples; Adaptive Proxy relies on LLM until the Proxy becomes as good as the baseline. Table 9: Semantic ranking cost and latency comparison (1x for Proxy) for ranking 500 candidate documents. Proxy re-quires labeling 200 documents with LLM for training. Re-Ranker LLM Proxy 

Cost 0.025 × 2.5× 1×

Latency 0.11 × 1.1× 1×

regression and rich text embedding-based proxy approximation (Proxy) across various IR benchmark datasets from Table 4. To con-trol the cost of ranking tens and hundreds of documents per query, we filter 500 candidate documents per query based on the query and document embedding vector similarity before re-ranking to retrieve the top-10 documents ordered by the relevancy; the proxy model is trained on 200 random samples (labeled by LLM) from the 500 candidates, successfully eliminating 300 LLM calls per query. The similarity based pre-filtering (Top-K) is a standard practice for semantic ranking to control the cost in practice, as well as in the literature [ 29 , 32 ]. Such sampling strategy is still more expensive than RANDOM (the default sampling for semantic filtering) but much cheaper than Stratified, as shown in Table 10. Overall, Re-Ranker achieves the best performance on five out of six datasets. For a candidate set of 500, it is also the most efficient option, operating at just 2.5% of the proxy’s normalized cost 5 and 1% of the LLM baseline, as shown in Table 9. Re-Ranker underper-formed on TREC-DL-2022, which requires nuanced 4-level scroing rubrics. In such reasoning-heavy tasks, the LLM provides superior quality, and Proxy acts as a high-fidelity approximation at roughly 40% of the baseline LLM cost. The HellaSwag results highlight the limits and potential of proxy-based ranking. Unlike simpler relevance-based ranking, HellaSwag 

> 5Re-Ranker can batch 100 documents per inference (5 inference calls to rank 500 documents) without quality degradation, whereas we need 200 LLM inference calls to label the training data for Proxy.

requires nuanced commonsense reasoning to select the most sensi-cal ending out of four possible options for a given context. Despite this difficulty, the proxy provides a latency reduction, correspond-ing to 300 LLM inference calls, while maintaining a nDCG@10 within 54% (relative accuracy) of the LLM. Although HellaSwag benchmark has a moderate class label imbalanced ratio, 1 positive (true ending) to 3 negative (false endings) per claim, we always pre-filter 200 training samples for training, leading to heavy im-balanced ratio with just a single positive instance. When there is insufficient minority class examples, the proxy model cannot learn the correct LLM decision functions. Proxy fails to learn the LLM decision functions for the similar reasons on SciFact, SCIDOCS, FIQA-2018, where the number of relevant documents per query ranges from 1.1 to 4.9, making effective sampling and training near impossible. In these instances, the imbalance ratio increases linearly with sample size (Figure 4(c)), necessitating an automatic fallback to the LLM baseline. While we focus on evaluating the proxy model approach as an substitution for LLM-based AI.RANK, the results strongly indi-cate that the existing state-of-the-art cross-attention re-ranker (Re-Ranker) is very effective in many semantic ranking settings [ 1, 19 ]. Given these results, we identify the integration of specialized re-rankers into our adaptive selection framework as a key future direction (Section 6.1). 

## 5.4 Impact of Sampling Strategy 

The practice of sampling is such a crucial step to the efficacy and the accuracy of the proxy approximation. Ideally, the training sample for proxy models should be sufficient and well balanced in class labels to ensure stability and accuracy in predictions. As prescribed in [ 9], active learning based sampling can greatly improve the sam-ple efficiency for proxy model training (i.e., achieve the same model quality with fewer samples). Furthermore, class label balanced sam-pling is critical for the accuracy of proxy approximation because a proxy model trained with heavily imbalanced data yields poor performance (Section 5.5). Figure 4 illustrates how different sampling strategies perform in terms of sample imbalance ratios, across different benchmark datasets. We use two classification benchmark datasets of low and high population imbalance ratios ( 𝜌 ) and two IR benchmark datasets of low and high relevant docs/query ratios ( 𝛾 ) – high imbalance ratio and low relevant docs/query mean that the datasets are much harder to sample from to obtain a well balanced training sample. We consider three sampling strategies: top-K similarity based sam-ple retrieval (Top-K), random sampling (Random), active learning (AL) for stratified sampling. AL takes the proxy model prediction confidence to identify most-likely majority or minority class exam-ples and always samples the minority class examples. On the one hand, when the population label distribution is highly imbalanced (a), both Top-K and Random fail to establish a good balanced train-ing dataset. On the other hand, (b) low population imbalance ratio allows the cheap Random to perform as good as more expensive stratified sampling (AL). IR datasets are always heavily imbalanced due to much larger corpus document size. For this reason, retrieval is relatively harder to apply our proxy model approximation pro-cess, as discussed in Section 5.3. Here we look at two contrasting Chung et al. 200 400 600 800 

> Number of Samples Queried
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> Imbalance Ratio
> ToxicConversationsClassification
> Top-K (Similarity)
> Random (Baseline)
> AL (Stratified)

(a) 𝜌 =11.61 200 400 600 800  

> Number of Samples Queried
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Imbalance Ratio
> AmazonPolarityClassification
> Top-K (Similarity)
> Random (Baseline)
> AL (Stratified)

(b) 𝜌 =2.21 200 400 600 800  

> Number of Samples Queried
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> Imbalance Ratio
> scifact
> Top-K (Similarity)
> Random (Baseline)
> AL (Stratified)

(c) 𝛾 =1.1/5K 200 400 600 800  

> Number of Samples Queried
> 200
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> Imbalance Ratio
> trec-covid
> Top-K (Similarity)
> Random (Baseline)
> AL (Stratified)

(d) 𝛾 =493.5/171K 

Figure 4: Impact of sampling strategies on training data imbalance ratios, measured across various datasets of varying degrees of dataset characteristics: imbalance ratio ( 𝜌 ), for classification benchmark datasets (a)(b); Relevant docuemtns per query ( 𝛾 ) / the number of corpus documents, for IR benchmark datasets (c)(d). 

cases with 𝛾 =1.1 and 𝛾 =493.5. When there is just one relevant doc-ument out of 5K documents (c), it is near impossible to establish a meaningful and balanced training sample, even with oversampling. Consequentially, the imbalance ratio almost linearly increases with the number of samples. When there are a sufficient number of relevant documents per query (d), we can build meaning training sample with the stratified sampling strategy (AL). Note that Top-K results in higher imbalance ratios as it blindly favors one class over the other by query and document relevancy. 

Table 10: Latency overhead multipliers (1 × for Random) for sampling 1000 sample instances from the Toxic Conversa-tions dataset with 52K rows. Random Top-K AL (Stratified) 

1× 43761 × 51639 ×

Table 10 illustrates the stark cost difference between Random and AL (Stratified). Note that the sampling step can be parallelizable over multiple workers and shards. Here, we measure the serialized latency in order to focus on the sampling overhead at the algorithm-level. While more advanced stratified sampling (AL) can yield more robust and balanced training sample, simple random sampling can also perform well if the dataset (table) is not heavily imbalanced. 

## 5.5 Imbalanced Data Label Challenge 

The performance of the original imbalanced trained (Standard) is not robust against the data label imbalance, whereas various imbalanced training techniques can significantly increase model robustness and improve generalization across different imbalance ratios, as illustrated in Figure 5. With heavily skewed label distri-butions (imbalance ratio ≥ 50.0), simple downsampling of majority class samples (Downsampled) can yield the best performance, since it preserves the original sample distribution for the minority class. We use SMOTE [ 3] for oversampling around the existing minority class distributions. While SMOTE (also bootstrapping) can be more effective when there are insufficient minority class samples, such oversampling (or re-sampling) can change the distributions with synthetic sample instances (or modified sample importance) and the decision decision boundaries for good or bad. 

Table 11: Latency overhead multipliers (1 × for imbalanced training) across different imbalanced training techniques, with simulated imbalanced ratio of 10.0 Balanced Downsampled Bootstrapped Oversampled 

1.30 × 1.41 × 2.46 × 3.07 ×

Table 11 summarizes the training overheads (latency overhead normalized to that of Standard) of various imbalanced training techniques, for a fixed imbalanced ratio of 10.0. The actual over-heads can vary and may increase with larger tables and higher imbalanced ratio – however, one can expect a similar trend where Balanced and Downsampled are relatively much cheaper than the others. However, given that training is such a small portion ( ≤ 2%) of the end-to-end proxy model optimization process, we can afford to try more expensive techniques, like Oversampling, especially when there are too few minority class samples (e.g., ≤ 100 sample instances). 

## 5.6 Role of Embedding Quality 

The selection of the input embedding model and the embedding vector dimension plays a crucial role in the success of the proxy approximation. In Figure 6 we demonstrate how different embed-ding models of varying complexity and cost affect the classifica-tion performance of the trained proxy models. The older, 768-dimensional Gecko ( text-embedding-005 ) model provides consis-tently high-quality text embeddings across most benchmarks (see other benchmark results where we use Gecko model for proxy model training). Notably, it outperforms the more expensive, larger 3072-dimensional Gemini (gemini-embedding-001) embeddings on the Tweet Sentiment extraction benchmark, suggesting that raw dimensionality does not always translate to superior quality for all tasks. The open-source Gemma ( embeddinggemma-300m ) model is the latest and most affordable option. However, proxy models trained using Gemma embeddings consistently exhibit the low-est performance, confirming that cost-savings at the embedding layer may translate into an unacceptable loss of accuracy for the downstream proxy classification. All three select embedding models use Matryoshka Represen-tation Learning (MRL) [ 38 ] to generate embeddings with prefixes 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 1 5 10 50 100 150 

> Imbalance Ratio (Majority/Minority)
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Macro F1 Score
> Standard (Baseline)
> Weighted Loss
> Bootstrapping
> Downsampling
> Oversampling (SMOTE)

(a) Amazon Polarity 1 5 10 50 100 150  

> Imbalance Ratio (Majority/Minority)
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Macro F1 Score
> Standard (Baseline)
> Weighted Loss
> Bootstrapping
> Downsampling
> Oversampling (SMOTE)

(b) Tweet Sentiment 1 5 10 50 100 150  

> Imbalance Ratio (Majority/Minority)
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Macro F1 Score
> Standard (Baseline)
> Weighted Loss
> Bootstrapping
> Downsampling
> Oversampling (SMOTE)

(c) Toxic Conversation 

Figure 5: Impact of different imbalanced label training techniques, as described in Section 4.2. 

Figure 6: Impact of embedding model and dimensionality on proxy model classification performance. Note that Gecko (text-embedding-005 ) and Gemma ( embeddinggemma-300m [13 ]) support embedding dimension size up to 768, and Gemini (gemini-embedding-001 ) supports up to 3072. Table 12: Embedding generation cost comparison for Tweet Sentiment test split (3534 rows)–this should increases lin-early with the number of rows, since we are processing a fixed number of rows (20) per generation request. Model Dmax Latency (sec) Cost 1 ($) Size (MB) 

Gemma 768 1x 1x 10.35 Gecko 768 1.81x 18.1x 10.35 Gemini 3072 4.18x 27.6x 41.41  

> 1

Cost is computed based on Gemini embedding model pricing [16] for Gecko and Gemini, and the cost of running a high CPU VM (8 vCPU, 16 GB RAM) for Gemma. 

working as a summary or simplified versions of the same informa-tion. While the models can generate reduced dimension embed-dings with the same information, the compression results in the lower embedding quality – observed across the models. In Table 12, we compare the embedding generation costs of Gecko, Gemma and Gemini at their supported maximum embedding dimensions. Gemma is the fastest and also the most cost-efficient option. Gecko can be as effective as Gemini, as shown in Figure 6, but at a much lower cost than Gemini. Gemma’s latency overhead and cost are used as references for normalization. The latency gap between Gemma and other models can be much larger on GPU, but it will also shrink the cost gap. Note that Gemini embeddings at 𝐷 = 3072 

are also much larger, which leads to higher storage cost and can be non-trivial for large tables. Figure 7 presents a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) vi-sualization comparing the distinctiveness of Gemma and Gecko embeddings ( 𝐷 = 768 ) across four different classification bench-mark datasets. We perform PCA analysis of the each embedding vector to select two most informational principal components (di-mensions) of the vector and them, as X and Y axes, to visualize the embeddings. Each plot is annotated with separability score defined as a ratio between average inter class distance and average intra class variance. Separability score measures how each cluster is com-pactly defined and isolated. The higher the separability score is the easier it is to separate and classify different classes. The overall takeaway is that Gecko is a better embedding model and reuslts in more distinctive clusters that are well separated, compared to those by Gemma. This explains why Gemma often results in in-ferior proxy approximation performances. Emotion classification dataset contains 6 different label clusters that are dispersed with significant overlap (low separability score). It is one of the harder benchmark dataset for our proxy approximation. Chung et al. 

Figure 7: Embedding distinctiveness illustrated by PCA visualization (X-axis is PC1, Y-axis is PC2) and separability scores across various benchmark datasets with Gemma and Gecko embedding models, dimension 𝐷 = 768 

## 5.7 Online VS. Offline Training and Model Selection 

Table 13: Normalized training latency to the LR training la-tency (1x) and tuned model performance on Tweet Sentiment dataset. Metric LR SVM RF XGB 

F1 Score (default) 0.867 0.861 0.841 0.858 F1 Score (tuned) 0.867 0.861 0.836 0.848 Training Latency 1x 49.84x 1.42x 3.18x Table 13 summarizes the F1-scores achieved with default param-eters versus tuned parameters via offline grid search, evaluated on the Tweet Sentiment dataset with four common classification algo-rithms: Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), and XGBoost (XGB). To our surprise, the bene-fit of hyperparameter tuning, while expensive and time-consuming offline, resulted in negligible or even slightly negative changes to the F1 score. For instance, the LR model retained an F1 score of 0.867 after tuning, showing no improvement. This lack of significant improvement was also observed across several other classification benchmark datasets, suggesting that the underlying embedding vectors are highly effective regardless of marginal model complex-ity. This finding eliminates the primary rationale for performing iterative, resource-intensive hyperparameter optimization during our online training process. Table 13 also summarizes the normalized training latency over-head, normalized to the LR training latency (1x), for different classi-fication models using the default parameters. When comparing the normalized training latency LR stands out dramatically. LR repre-sents the baseline (1x), while the next fastest model (RF) introduces a 1.42x overhead. SVM introduce a massive 49.84x overhead, and XGB requires 3.18x the time. With LR providing the best balance of performance and speed (it is the fastest model and tied for the high-est F1 score), we select Logistic Regression (LR) as the canonical online proxy model classification algorithm. 

## 5.8 Proxy Model Robustness Across Relational Filter Predicates 

In this section, we focus on the robustness of the proxy model when combined with relational filter predicates (e.g., segmenting data by age group, like AI.IF("review sentiment is positive") for age group A vs. B. In online training, we are training a proxy for each ad hoc query. In offline training, we pre-train a model for known query patterns and would like to re-use it for different data slices. It would be hard to pre-train a proxy model for all possible data cubes/slices. It is crucial to determine whether a general proxy model, trained on a sample of the entire data population, remains effective when applied to specific data slices [5, 6]. Table 14(a) illustrates how the general proxy model trained on the entire California Housing dataset performs on eight mutually exclusive data slices, defined by a combination of three attributes: 

median_house_value , median_income , latitude . The (*) line shows the F1-score for the whole dataset, without any relational filter predicates. When LLM fails to produce accurate predictions (slices 1, 3, 5, 7), Proxy actually performs better. In fact, the relative accuracy close to 1.0 and for some, including the slices where LLM struggles, relative accuracy is much greater than 1.0. Table 14(b) reports the performance comparison with proxy models trained on the samples taken from each target data slice. 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 

Table 14: Proxy and LLM performance (F1-Score) comparison across data slices of the California Housing dataset. This comparison highlights the difference between training on a global sample versus training specifically on sliced data. 

> (a) Proxy model trained on global sample data (*).

Slice ID Proxy F1 LLM F1 Relative Accuracy 

* 0.945 0.908 1.040 0 0.977 0.993 0.984 1 0.617 0.334 1.847 2 0.980 0.992 0.988 3 0.244 0.100 2.440 4 0.977 0.998 0.979 5 0.841 0.575 1.463 6 0.960 0.977 0.983 7 0.596 0.355 1.679 

> (b) Proxy model trained on slice-specific samples.

Slice ID Proxy F1 LLM F1 Relative Accuracy 

0 0.972 0.993 0.978 1 0.296 0.334 0.886 2 0.991 0.992 0.998 3 0.091 0.100 0.910 4 0.977 0.998 0.979 5 0.508 0.575 0.883 6 0.960 0.977 0.983 7 0.292 0.355 0.822 

Interestingly, training a specialized proxy model for a given slice did not yield meaningful performance improvements and rather performed worse (slices 1, 3, 5, 7) due to insufficient and/or im-balanced training data. While the robustness of a general proxy model trained for the entire table can be a data-dependent property, our findings suggest that a general proxy model still exhibit high relative accuracy and it can still perform reliably on most of the data slices, provided that the LLM is able to accurately label the slice sample data (when LLM accuracy is low, so is the proxy). 

## 6 Discussion and Lessons for Future Research 6.1 Optimize Using Diverse Array of Models 

Future query engines featuring semantic operators should leverage a diverse array of specialized proxy models for semantic operators, significantly enhancing the capability beyond simple classifiers and a single LLM baseline. This array includes simple, cost-effective al-ternatives such as logistic regression models and fine-tuned and/or small LLMs. In addition, for ranking, cross-attention ranking APIs (a.k.a. re-rankers) are beneficial for many use cases. While model cascading, as applied in prior work (e.g., [ 21 , 32 ]) to substitute smaller LLMs, offers a precedent for optimization and accuracy guarantees, utilizing the full diverse array of “cheap" models is a primary avenue for research. 

Table 15: AI.CLASSIFY performance comparison: LLM vs. Proxy Approximation (Precision / Recall) Dataset LLM (P / R) Approx (P / R) by Sample Size 1,000 4,000 8,000 

BBC News 0.94 / 0.94 0.95 / 0.95 — —DBpedia 0.98 / 0.98 0.83 / 0.65 0.94 / 0.95 0.96 / 0.96 

> BBC News has 5 categories, DBpedia [46] has 14 categories.

## 6.2 Proxies for other AI Query Operators 

While our primary focus is on AI.IF (semantic filter) and AI.RANK (semantic ranking), the proxy strategy is extensible to other seman-tic operators. 

Semantic Classification: AI.IF proxy model can be extended to AI.CLASSIFY for multi-class classification. For logistic regression or many other common classification models, this extension only requires labeling each sample instance with non-binary labels. A significant challenge remains the “Needle-in-a-Haystack" sampling problem; obtaining sufficient representative examples for every class-label is essential for accurate model training, particularly for rare or minority classes. Table 15 illustrates that the proxy approach could work for multi-label classification, but it requires more samples (random sampling) as the number of class labels increases. 

Semantic Join: A semantic join typically involves expensive LLM calls to evaluate conditions across join keys. While a proxy can be trained to predict these outcomes and accelerate execution (e.g., train a single multi-label classifier or a binary classifier for each distinct key from the smaller join table), a naïve application still re-quires 𝑂 (𝑁 ×𝑀 ) inferences. This remains prohibitively expensive at scale; for instance, joining two tables of 10,000 rows would require 100 million inferences. A complete solution requires integrating proxies with effective pre-filtering [ 32 ], such as vector similarity, to limit the candidate pairs before proxy-based evaluation. While opti-mizing join algorithms is outside the current scope of this work, our evaluation of the proxy approach for classification tasks provides the foundation for such future systems. Beyond scalability, the high selectivity of semantic joins poses the “Needle-in-a-Haystack” chal-lenge observed in semantic ranking, where extremely low densities of relevant matches makes effective samplign and training nearly impossible (e.g., SciFact in Table 8). Consequently, the efficacy of a proxy-based join will highly depend on specific workload char-acteristics, such as join selectivity and the semantic complexity of the join predicate, calling for more specialized algorithms in future work. 

## 7 Conclusion & Future Work 

In this paper, we studied the feasibility of non-LLM based proxy models as a viable alternative to LLMs for semantic operators, for both BigQuery (OLAP) and AlloyDB HTAP database setups. Through detailed experiments we demonstrated that proxy models can provide 100x latency and cost improvements while achieving similar accuracy as their LLM-based counterparts. This is possible Chung et al. 

by reducing the AI.IF and AI.RANK operators into binary classifi-cation, careful stratified sampling and effective embedding models. The key insight is that cost-effective large-scale OLAP and ultra-low latency HTAP using semantic operators are possible. Future optimizers should use such low cost proxy models, falling back to costly LLM invocations for specific hard use cases and only when necessary. When such optimizers emerge, this study should be re-vised to measure the effectiveness of systems that automate the use of mixes of models. 

## References 

[1] Lukas Bruderer and Mihai Ciorobea. 2025. Boost your Search and RAG agents with Vertex AI’s new state-of-the-art Ranking API. Google Cloud Blog (30 May 2025). https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/launching-our-new-state-of-the-art-vertex-ai-ranking-api [2] Iñigo Casanueva, Hector Perez-Iglesias, Abhinav Rao, Xiaoxue Liu, Yufan Wang, and Hao Sun. 2020. Efficient Intent Detection with Dual Sentence Encoder and Label-Aware Attention. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Natural Lan-guage Processing for Conversational AI . 79–86. https://aclanthology.org/2020. nlp4convai-1.12/ [3] Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research 16 (2002), 321–357. [4] Ethan Chern, Steffi Freihat, Yangni Shieh, Stephen Wan, Junjie Zhao, Wayne Xin Zhao, et al . 2023. FacTool: Factuality Detection in Generative AI – A Tool Augmented Framework for Multi-Task and Multi-Domain Scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528 (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13528 [5] Yeounoh Chung, Tim Kraska, Neoklis Polyzotis, Ki Hyun Tae, and Steven Eui-jong Whang. 2019. Automated data slicing for model validation: A big data-ai integration approach. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 32, 12 (2019), 2284–2296. [6] Yeounoh Chung, Tim Kraska, Steven Euijong Whang, and Neoklis Polyzotis. 2019. Slice Finder: Automated Data Slicing for Model Validation. In ICDE . 1514–1525. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2019.00138 [7] Arman Cohan, Sergey Feldman, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Daniel S. Weld. 2020. SPECTER: Document-level Representation Learning using Citation-informed Transformers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL) . 4211–4222. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.384 [8] Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Campos, Jimmy Lin, Ellen M. Voorhees, and Ian Soboroff. 2022. Overview of the TREC 2022 Deep Learning Track. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2022) (NIST Special Publication 500-338) . https://trec.nist.gov/pubs/trec31/papers/ Overview_deep.pdf [9] Hanjun Dai, Bethany Wang, Xingchen Wan, Bo Dai, Sherry Yang, Azade Nova, Pengcheng Yin, Mangpo Phothilimthana, Charles Sutton, and Dale Schuurmans. 2024. UQE: A Query Engine for Unstructured Databases. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 29807–29838. [10] Databricks. 2025. AI Functions on Databricks. https://docs.databricks.com/aws/ en/large-language-models/ai-functions. Accessed: 2025-07-31. [11] Anas Dorbani, Sunny Yasser, Jimmy Lin, and Amine Mhedhbi. 2025. Beyond Quacking: Deep Integration of Language Models and RAG into DuckDB. Pro-ceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18, 12 (2025), 5415–5418. doi:10.14778/3750601. 3750685 [12] Xinyi Gao, Dongting Xie, Yihang Zhang, Zhengren Wang, Chong Chen, Con-ghui He, Hongzhi Yin, and Wentao Zhang. 2025. A Comprehensive Survey on Imbalanced Data Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08960 (2025). [13] Google. 2025. google/embedding-gemma-300m . https://huggingface.co/google/ embeddinggemma-300m [14] Google Cloud. 2025. AlloyDB AI. https://cloud.google.com/alloydb/ai?e= 48754805. Accessed: 2025-07-31. [15] Google Cloud. 2025. BigQuery ML overview. https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/ docs/bqml-introduction. Accessed: July 31, 2025. [16] Google Cloud. 2025. Generative AI pricing . Google. https://cloud.google.com/ vertex-ai/generative-ai/pricing [17] Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini: Model Thinking Updates. Google DeepMind Blog Post. https://blog.google/technology/google-deepmind/gemini-model-thinking-updates-march-2025/ Accessed: October 2025. [18] David Greene and Pádraig Cunningham. 2006. Practical Solutions to the Problem of Diagonal Dominance in Kernel Document Clustering. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . ACM, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 377–384. [19] Srinivasan Iyer, Sewon Min, Yashar Mehdad, and Wen-tau Yih. 2021. RECON-SIDER: improved re-ranking using span-focused cross-attention for open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies . 1280–1287. [20] Zhaocheng Ji, Hao Sun, Jun Du, Yan Xu, Ruiqi Wang, Shuo Yuan, Jing Li, Shanshan Liu, Yuan Li, Wenbo Zhu, and Yan Shen. 2022. MHQA: Multi-hop Question Answering on Mental Health. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02111 (2022). https: //arxiv.org/abs/2210.02111 [21] Saehan Jo and Immanuel Trummer. 2024. Thalamusdb: Approximate query processing on multi-modal data. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 

2, 3 (2024), 1–26. [22] Kaggle. 2020. Tweet Sentiment Extraction - Kaggle Competition. Web link to Kaggle competition. https://www.kaggle.com/c/tweet-sentiment-extraction/ Accessed: October 2025. [23] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, et al . 2023. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 (2023). [24] Jinhyuk Lee, Feiyang Chen, Sahil Dua, Daniel Cer, Madhuri Shanbhogue, Iftekhar Naim, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Zhe Li, Kaifeng Chen, Henrique Schechter Vera, Xiaoqi Ren, Shanfeng Zhang, Daniel Salz, Michael Boratko, Jay Han, Blair Chen, Shuo Huang, Vikram Rao, Paul Suganthan, Feng Han, Andreas Doumanoglou, Nithi Gupta, Fedor Moiseev, Cathy Yip, Aashi Jain, Simon Baum-gartner, Shahrokh Shahi, Frank Palma Gomez, Sandeep Mariserla, Min Choi, Parashar Shah, Sonam Goenka, Ke Chen, Ye Xia, Koert Chen, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Yichang Chen, Trevor Walker, Wenlei Zhou, Rakesh Ghiya, Zach Gleicher, Karan Gill, Zhe Dong, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Yunhsuan Sung, Raphael Hoff-mann, and Tom Duerig. 2025. Gemini Embedding: Generalizable Embeddings from Gemini. arXiv:2503.07891 [cs.CL] [25] Jinhyuk Lee, Zhuyun Dai, Xiaoqi Ren, Blair Chen, Daniel Cer, Jeremy R. Cole, Kai Hui, Michael Boratko, Rajvi Kapadia, Wen Ding, Yi Luan, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Weiqiang Shi, Nithi Gupta, Aditya Kusupati, Prateek Jain, Siddhartha Reddy Jonnalagadda, Ming-Wei Chang, and Iftekhar Naim. 2024. Gecko: Versatile Text Embeddings Distilled from Large Language Models. arXiv:2403.20327 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.20327 [26] Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2011. Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies . 142–150. https://aclanthology.org/ P11-1015/ [27] Macedo Maia, Siegfried Handschuh, André Freitas, Brian Davis, Ross McDer-mott, Manel Zarrouk, and Alexandra Balahur. 2018. WWW’18 Open Chal-lenge: Financial Opinion Mining and Question Answering. In WWW ’18 Com-panion: The 2018 Web Conference Companion . ACM, Lyon, France, 1941–1942. doi:10.1145/3184558.3192301 [28] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. s1: Simple test-time scaling. arXiv:2501.19393 [cs.CL] [29] Baharan Nouriinanloo and Maxime Lamothe. 2024. Re-Ranking Step by Step: Investigating Pre-Filtering for Re-Ranking with Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18740 (2024). [30] OpenAI. 2022. Classification using embeddings. https://cookbook.openai.com/ examples/classification_using_embeddings. Accessed: 2025-07-29. [31] R. Kelley Pace and Ronald Barry. 1997. Sparse Spatial Autoregressions. Statistics and Probability Letters 33, 3 (1997), 291–297. doi:10.1016/S0167-7152(96)00076-4 [32] Liana Patel, Siddharth Jha, Carlos Guestrin, and Matei Zaharia. 2024. Lotus: Enabling semantic queries with llms over tables of unstructured and structured data. arXiv e-prints (2024), arXiv–2407. [33] Liana Patel, Siddharth Jha, Carlos Guestrin, and Matei Zaharia. 2025. Palimpzest: Optimizing AI-Powered Analytics with Declarative Query Processing. In Proceed-ings of the 11th International Conference on Very Large Databases (CIDR 2025) . Am-sterdam, The Netherlands, 12. https://vldb.org/cidrdb/papers/2025/p12-liu.pdf [34] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 85 (2011), 2825–2830. http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html [35] Kirk Roberts, Tasmeer Alam, Steven Bedrick, Dina Demner-Fushman, Kyle Lo, Ian Soboroff, Ellen M. Voorhees, Lucy Lu Wang, and William R. Hersh. 2021. Searching for scientific evidence in a pandemic: An overview of TREC-COVID. 

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 121 (2021), 103865. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103865 [36] Matthew Russo, Sivaprasad Sudhir, Gerardo Vitagliano, Chunwei Liu, Tim Kraska, Samuel Madden, and Michael Cafarella. 2025. Abacus: A Cost-Based Optimizer for Semantic Operator Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14661 (2025). [37] Elvis Saravia, Hsien-Che Liu, Yen-Hao Huang, Ssu-Han Wu, and Yi-Shin Chen. 2018. CARER: Contextualized Affect Representations for Emotion Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 100x Cost & Latency Reduction: Performance Analysis of AI Query Approximation using Lightweight Proxy Models 

Processing (EMNLP) . 3689–3698. https://aclanthology.org/D18-1404/ [38] Uri Shaham, Mor Geva, Roi Levi, and Yoav Shoham. 2023. Matryoshka Repre-sentation Learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 202 (2023), 30811–30829. [39] Shreya Shankar, Tristan Chambers, Tarak Shah, Aditya G Parameswaran, and Eugene Wu. 2024. Docetl: Agentic query rewriting and evaluation for complex document processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12189 (2024). [40] Sahel Sharifymoghaddam, Ronak Pradeep, Andre Slavescu, Ryan Nguyen, An-drew Xu, Zijian Chen, Yilin Zhang, Yidi Chen, Jasper Xian, and Jimmy Lin. 2025. RankLLM: A Python Package for Reranking with LLMs. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 3681–3690. [41] Charlie Victor Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute Optimally can be More Effective than Scaling Model Parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314 (2024). [42] Snowflake Inc. 2025. AI SQL. https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/ snowflake-cortex/aisql. Accessed: 2025-07-31. [43] Weiwei Sun, Lingyong Yan, Xinyu Ma, Shuaiqiang Wang, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun Ren. 2023. Is ChatGPT good at search? investigat-ing large language models as re-ranking agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09542 

(2023). [44] TensorFlow Tutorial. 2023. Word embeddings. https://www.tensorflow.org/text/ guide/word_embeddings. Accessed: 2025-07-29. [45] text2vec.org. 2018. Vectorization. https://text2vec.org/vectorization.html. Ac-cessed: 2025-07-29. [46] The Devastator. 2022. DBpedia Ontology: Text Classification Dataset with 14 Classes. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thedevastator/dbpedia-ontology-dataset Kaggle Dataset. [47] James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018. FEVER: a Large-scale Dataset for Fact Extraction and VERification. In 

NAACL-HLT .[48] Matthias Urban and Carsten Binnig. 2024. Eleet: Efficient learned query execution over text and tables. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 17, 13 (2024), 4867–4880. [49] Enzo Veltri, Donatello Santoro, Jean-Flavien Bussotti, and Paolo Papotti. 2025. Logical and physical optimizations for SQL query execution over large language models. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 3, 3 (2025), 181:1–181:28. doi:10.1145/3725411 [50] David Wadden, Shanchuan Lin, Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Madeleine van Zuylen, Arman Cohan, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Fact or Fiction: Verifying Scientific Claims. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . 7545–7557. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.609 [51] Ellery Wulczyn, Nithum Thain, and Samuel Dixon. 2017. Ex Machina: Personal Attacks Detoxified. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW) . 1371–1379. doi:10.1145/3038912.3052591 [52] Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can a Machine Really Finish Your Sentence?. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .[53] Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015. Character-level Convolutional Networks for Text Classification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , Vol. 28. 649–657. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/ paper/2015/file/8559aa24a0d8102d861d85d03831b0e5-Paper.pdf