Title: LogicPoison: Logical Attacks on Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02954v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:42:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# LogicPoison: Logical Attacks on Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

Yilin Xiao ♠*, Jin Chen ♣*, Qinggang Zhang ♠, Yujing Zhang ♠,Chuang Zhou ♠, Longhao Yang ♣, Lingfei Ren ♣†, Xin Yang ♣, Xiao Huang ♠♣Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, ♠The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

yilin.xiao@connect.polyu.hk jordchen@163.com renlf@swufe.edu.cn xiaohuang@comp.polyu.edu.hk 

Abstract 

Graph-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (GraphRAG) enhances the reasoning capabil-ities of Large Language Models (LLMs) by grounding their responses in structured knowl-edge graphs. Leveraging community detection and relation filtering techniques, GraphRAG systems demonstrate inherent resistance to tra-ditional RAG attacks, such as text poisoning and prompt injection. However, in this paper, we find that the security of GraphRAG sys-tems fundamentally relies on the topological integrity of the underlying graph, which can be undermined by implicitly corrupting the logi-cal connections, without altering surface-level text semantics. To exploit this vulnerability, we propose L OGIC POISON , a novel attack frame-work that targets logical reasoning rather than injecting false contents. Specifically, L OG -

> IC

POISON employs a type-preserving entity swapping mechanism to perturb both global logic hubs for disrupting overall graph connec-tivity and query-specific reasoning bridges for severing essential multi-hop inference paths. This approach effectively reroutes valid reason-ing into dead ends while maintaining surface-level textual plausibility. Comprehensive ex-periments across multiple benchmarks demon-strate that L OGIC POISON successfully by-passes GraphRAG’s defenses, significantly de-grading performance and outperforming state-of-the-art baselines in both effectiveness and stealth. Our code is available at https:// github.com/Jord8061/logicPoison .

1 Introduction 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2026b) has emerged as a promising paradigm for enhancing Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024; Guo et al., 2025) by lever-aging external knowledge bases. However, ex-

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. GraphRAG System                

> Corpus Processing & Graph Construction Graph Traversal
> &Reasoning
> Entity &Relation
> Extraction
> Malicious
> Doc
> KG
> Structural
> Isolation
> Retrieved Subgraph
> / Context (Clean)
> Correct Output
> Attacker
> 1) Corpus Poisoning
> 2) Prompt Injection 3) Retriever Attacks
> Failed
> Extraction
> Semantic Attack

Figure 1: Traditional attacks on LLM or RAG are dif-ficult to pose an effective threat to GraphRAG system. This is mainly due to two characteristics. First, the construction process of the knowledge graph naturally filters part of the attack content. Second, the unique retrieval and reasoning mechanism of graph structure further improves the difficulty of attack implementation. 

isting RAG systems face significant challenges when processing large-scale, unstructured corpora in real-world scenarios. The relevant information is often unevenly distributed across heterogeneous documents (Xiao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2026). Consequently, the contexts retrieved by traditional RAG are frequently voluminous, fragmented, and lacking in structural organization, leading to in-consistencies in generation accuracy and coher-ence. To address these limitations, Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation (GraphRAG) (Zhang et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2026a) has gained prominence as a robust solution. By struc-turing knowledge into graphs, GraphRAG mod-els hierarchical relationships and supports efficient multi-hop retrieval and reasoning, enabling more reliable use of background knowledge. Security remains a critical challenge for Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems due to their reliance on external corpora, which ex-poses them to adversarial attacks. As shown in Fig-1

> arXiv:2604.02954v1 [cs.CL] 3 Apr 2026

ure 1, prior research has identified three primary at-tack types: (i) Corpus Poisoning (Zou et al., 2025): injecting malicious documents into the knowledge source; (ii) Prompt Injection (Hines et al., 2024; Suo, 2024), where adversarial instructions are em-bedded within retrieved text to hijack model behav-ior; and (iii) Retriever Attacks (Wallace et al., 2019; Shafran et al., 2025), that craft deceptive queries to degrade the retrieval accuracy. However, these methods are largely ineffective against GraphRAG due to its graph-based archi-tecture. By constructing a knowledge graph from source corpora, GraphRAG introduces inherent de-fensive mechanisms. First, poisoning attacks are topologically marginalized, as synthetic entities fail to integrate into coherent graph communities. Sec-ond, and most critically, prompt injection is struc-turally prevented: retrieval operates over entity-relation subgraphs rather than raw text, thereby decoupling knowledge access from instruction exe-cution and filtering out embedded adversarial com-mands. Besides that, because reasoning occurs over multiple connected paths within the graph, at-tacks targeting single nodes or local content fail to corrupt the system’s global inference capabil-ity, as alternative uncontaminated reasoning paths remain available. Recent work like GRAGPOI-SON (Liang et al., 2025) has taken initial steps to attack GraphRAG. However, it relies heavily on LLM-generated contents to fabricate and amplify spurious relations, which is highly detectable. To make it clear, we conduct an in-depth analysis (in Appendix A.1) on the graph-based architecture and reveal that GraphRAG functions less as a static knowledge store and more as a dynamic logical reasoning engine. Its efficacy stems not from the quantity of stored triples, but from its ability to conduct logical propagation via topological struc-tures. Consequently, defeating GraphRAG requires disrupting its logical reasoning chains rather than merely corrupting isolated data points. However, the underlying graph structure is typically opaque (black-box) in practice, and different GraphRAG implementations employ diverse graph construc-tion and reasoning mechanisms. This imposes two primary challenges: (i) How to achieve effec-tive, and low-magnitude poisoning without knowl-edge of the underlying graph structure? (ii) How can such an attack remain robust and transferable across diverse GraphRAG architectures? 

To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel attack framework: L OGIC POISON . Different from traditional attack methods that rely on addi-tive noise or conflicting evidence, L OGIC POISON 

fundamentally targets the topological integrity of the knowledge graph constructed by GraphRAG systems. Specifically, it employs a Type-Preserving Entity Swapping mechanism to implicitly corrupt the graph structure without disrupting the textual surface. We devise a dual-pronged strategy to se-lect target entities: (i) Global Logic Poison, which identifies and perturbs high-frequency hub nodes to shatter global graph connectivity; and (ii) Query-Centric Logic Poison, which utilizes Chain-of-Thought extraction to pinpoint and sever specific reasoning bridges essential for multi-hop queries. By applying cyclic permutations to these key en-tities within their respective types, we ensure that while the document remains semantically readable, the underlying graph topology is rerouted into logi-cal dead ends or spurious shortcuts. Our contribu-tions are summarized as follows: • We identify a critical vulnerability in GraphRAG systems: while they are robust to unstructured noise, they are highly fragile to structural logic corruption. We formalize this as a topological security problem, shift-ing the attack surface from poisoned content injection to logic rewiring. • We propose L OGIC POISON , a unified frame-work that combines global centrality analysis with query-specific reasoning extraction. This method allows for low-magnitude, stealthy modifications that effectively bypass the com-munity summarization and filtering mecha-nism defenses inherent in GraphRAG. • We conduct comprehensive experiments on multiple benchmarks across various SOTA GraphRAG architectures and base LLMs. The results demonstrate that L OGIC POISON sig-nificantly degrades GraphRAG performance, outperforming existing baselines. 

2 Related Work 

The security of Retrieval-Augmented Generation models has gained considerable attention in the research community in recent years. The con-cept of Universal Adversarial Triggers (Wallace et al., 2019) and Indirect Prompt Injection (Hines et al., 2024; Suo, 2024) served as the foundation for initial results that pointed out the vulnerability 2I. Strategic Entity Selection II. Attack Mechanism III. Implicit Graph Corruption                      

> Corpus
> Queries
> Entity
> Entity
> Extraction
> Frequency
> Analysis
> Corpus
> Queries
> I. Strategic Entity Selection
> Entity set R
> II . Attack Mechanism
> Global Logic Pool
> Query -Centric Logic Pool
> ...
> Type -Preserving Entity Swapping
> III . Implicit Graph Corruption
> Swapped entity
> Wrong answer Poisoned Corpus
> Global Pool G
> LLM CoT
> Extraction
> Query -Centric Pool Q
> Bridge Entity
> Entity set R...
> ...
> ...
> ... Type Bucket
> Bijective mapping within same type
> Obama Trump Biden
> PERSON Type Bucket Wrong answer
> Corrupted Topology (Poisoned)
> AB’ C
> Intended Logic Chain (Clean)
> Right answer
> ABC
> ...

Figure 2: The overall framework of L OGIC POISON . The attack pipeline is divided into three stages: I. Strategic Entity Selection , where target entities are identified via a dual-pronged strategy combining global logic hubs and query-centric reasoning bridges into a unified set R. II. Attack Mechanism , which employs a type-preserving cyclic permutation to swap entities within their respective type buckets in the corpus. III. Implicit Graph Corruption ,demonstrating how the poisoned corpus subtly rewires the implicit topology of the constructed graph, severing valid reasoning chains ( A → B → C) and re-routing them to incorrect entities ( A → B′ → C), leading to wrong answers while maintaining textual plausibility. 

of large language models to any type of input at-tack. Starting with this point, various attacks on the RAG models have emerged in the pipeline: Poi-sonedRAG (Zou et al., 2025)defined knowledge-base poisoning for directing model behavior; PAN-DORA (Deng et al., 2024b) utilized retrieval func-tionality for conducting indirect jailbreak attacks; TrojanRAG (Cheng et al., 2024) optimized joint attacks for inserting backdoors in the retrieval con-texts; Jamming attacks (Shafran et al., 2025) ini-tiated denial-of-service conditions by promoting blocking documents; besides, privacy leakage is-sues intrinsic to the retrieval process were uncov-ered by further studies (Zeng et al., 2024). Most recently, GRAGPOISON (Liang et al., 2025) gener-alized GraphRAG attacks by injecting texts written by LLMs for simulating fake linkages in the graphs. The existing techniques were based on explicit content injection and additive perturbation. This work introduces L OGIC POISON , which changes the paradigm by re-modeling the topology of log-ical graphs to effectively manipulate GraphRAG by stealthy, type-preserving swapping, which cor-rupts GraphRAG in a logically implicit manner over more obvious generations. 

3 Preliminaries 

Given a retrieval corpus C = {di}Ni=1 and a set of queries Q. A GraphRAG system builds an implicit or explicit knowledge graph G = ( V, E) from C

to perform reasoning. Our objective is to obtain a poisoned corpus ˜C via a perturbation function 

T : C → ˜C, such that the system’s reasoning on ˜C

is disrupted, while being imperceptible and gram-matically coherent at the text level. In networked systems, the effectiveness of poisoning attacks is closely related to the structural importance of the targeted nodes. Since knowledge graphs are not available before graph construction, classical topo-logically centrality measures cannot be applied di-rectly. In such cases, corpus-level statistics offer alternative insights for node importance. From a spectral graph theory perspective (Spielman, 2012), global connectivity and information propagation are largely determined by the dominant modes of the adjacency structure, which are disproportion-ately influenced by high-degree nodes (Check more details in Appendix A.2.3). Consequently, high-frequency entities implicitly control the backbone of information flow, making them particularly ef-fective targets for poisoning attacks. 

4 The Framework of LogicPoison 

We propose the L OGIC POISON , a framework specifically targeting the GraphRAG systems on the principle of topological disruption. Contrary to traditional poisoning methods that inject con-spicuous amounts of misinformation, our solution 3carefully rewrites the logical reasoning chains in-herent in the corpus. By strategically permuting entities, we induce semantically plausible yet logi-cally fallacious paths in the constructed knowledge graph, misleading the system into generating confi-dent but incorrect answers. The corrupted corpus ˜C can be built by perform-ing the operation of type-preserving entity swap-ping on a candidate set of entities S. In order to have structural impact and querying relevance at the same time, we compose S using two comple-mentary sub-strategies: • Global Logic Poison: Targets corpus-level 

logic hubs to distort the global connectivity of the knowledge graph. • Query-Centric Logic Poison: Targets spe-cific entities essential for multi-hop logical reasoning chains to ensure the attack covers the precise paths required by user queries. 

4.1 Global Logic Poison 

GraphRAG systems rely on central entities to con-nect disparate information chunks. Disrupting these hubs destabilizes the global graph structure. 

Entity Extraction. We treat each document di ∈C as a processing knowledge unit. To iden-tify potential knowledge graph nodes, we employ a lightweight Named Entity Recognition (NER) model (e.g., spaCy). Formally, for each document 

di, we extract a set of typed entities: 

E(di) = {(e, τ ) | e ∈ V vocab , τ ∈ T } , (1) where e denotes the surface form and τ represents the entity type (e.g., P ERSON , O RG , D ATE ). 

Corpus-Level Frequency Analysis. We approx-imate the topological importance of an entity by its document frequency. For an entity e of type τ , we define its frequency as: 

f (e, τ ) = 

> N

X

> i=1

I(e, τ ) ∈ E(di), (2) where I[·] is the indicator function. Intuitively, en-tities with high f (e, τ ) act as implicit hubs that bridge numerous communities in the graph. 

Global Replacement Pool. To maximize disrup-tion, we rank entities within each type τ by f (e, τ )

and select the top-n% as targets:              

> Gτ={e|type (e) = τ∧rank (f(e, τ )) ≤n%}.(3)

The global candidate set is defined as G =S  

> τ∈T

Gτ . Poisoning these entities distorts the backbone of the reasoning graph, affecting a broad spectrum of retrieval operations. 

4.2 Query-Centric Logic Poison 

Global hubs may not cover long-tail entities critical for specific queries. To enforce path coverage, we introduce a query-guided selection mechanism. 

Chain-of-Thought Entity Extraction. For each multi-hop query q ∈ Q , we prompt an LLM to per-form Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to iden-tify entities essential for deriving the answer (e.g., bridge entities, comparison targets). This yields a structured set of reasoning entities: 

Eq = {(e, τ, r )}, (4) where r denotes the reasoning role (e.g., bridge ,

target ). This ensures we target logical dependen-cies of the query rather than superficial mentions. 

Corpus Verification. To prevent the hallucina-tion of non-existent targets, we perform a filtering step on Eq against the corpus inventory:               

> Ecorpus
> q={(e, τ )|(e, τ, r )∈Eq∧f(e, τ )>0}.(5)

This ensures that the attack only modifies entities that actually exist in C and participate in the knowl-edge graph construction pipeline. 

Query-Centric Replacement Pool. We aggre-gate these verified entities across all queries to form the query-centric replacement pool:               

> Qτ=[
> q∈Q
> {e|(e, τ )∈Ecorpus
> q},Q=[
> τ∈T
> Qτ.(6)

This design guarantees that if a GraphRAG system correctly follows the intended reasoning chain, it will inevitably traverse a poisoned node. 

4.3 Type-Preserving Entity Swapping Unified Candidate Set. We combine the global and query-centric pools into a unified set of target entities, which play complementary roles: 

Rτ = Gτ ∪ Q τ , R = [ 

> τ∈T

Rτ . (7) Crucially, we maintain strict type constraints dur-ing swapping to ensure the poisoned text remains locally plausible and grammatically valid, thereby bypassing syntax-based filters. 4Dataset LLM Attack Naive RAG GraphRAG GFM-RAG HippoRAG2                                                                                                                                                                 

> ASR ASR-G ASR ASR-G ASR ASR-G ASR ASR-G HotpotQA GPT-4o-mini PoisonedRAG 61.8 72.8 66.8 80.0 71.6 70.4 68.0 66.0 LogicPoison 92.0 91.6 78.4 92.2 81.0 78.0 73.6 66.2
> Llama-3.1-8B PoisonedRAG 51.0 58.8 64.4 78.0 55.8 49.4 68.4 63.6 LogicPoison 88.2 86.6 79.2 91.2 80.6 83.8 72.6 73.0
> Qwen-3-32B PoisonedRAG 56.8 68.2 65.8 80.2 71.6 35.0 71.8 67.6 LogicPoison 85.0 83.8 84.2 92.0 76.6 76.8 76.6 69.8
> 2Wiki GPT-4o-mini PoisonedRAG 64.4 83.4 58.6 77.4 57.2 56.6 74.8 70.4 LogicPoison 90.0 91.6 78.4 95.6 71.6 76.0 82.8 71.8
> Llama-3.1-8B PoisonedRAG 61.4 77.8 54.8 73.2 42.2 37.2 74.8 70.0 LogicPoison 95.4 94.4 78.8 95.0 74.2 85.6 77.4 74.2
> Qwen-3-32B PoisonedRAG 63.0 82.4 58.0 77.0 58.8 37.6 75.8 73.6 LogicPoison 82.2 83.4 78.6 93.2 71.4 79.8 87.4 76.6
> MuSi GPT-4o-mini PoisonedRAG 64.0 77.8 59.6 77.6 70.0 74.8 67.2 68.0 LogicPoison 99.2 99.2 91.4 97.0 92.6 93.4 90.2 88.0
> Llama-3.1-8B PoisonedRAG 58.2 64.4 60.2 75.4 43.0 42.6 59.4 57.8 LogicPoison 97.4 97.4 91.6 97.6 95.0 98.2 88.8 92.2
> Qwen-3-32B PoisonedRAG 66.2 80.0 61.2 77.6 59.2 62.0 67.4 67.0 LogicPoison 94.6 95.8 93.0 95.8 87.6 92.6 91.2 91.6

Table 1: Attack Performance (ASR and ASR-GPT) of L OGIC POISON and PoisonedRAG across different RAG frameworks, Datasets, and LLMs. 

Cyclic Permutation. For each entity type τ , we organize the entities in Rτ into a deterministic se-quence Sτ = [ e1, e 2, . . . , e m]. We define a cyclic permutation function πτ :

πτ (ei) = 

(

ei−1 if 1 < i ≤ m, em if i = 1 . (8) This mapping ensures that (i) every target entity is replaced by another entity of the same type, and (ii) the mapping is bijective and invertible. 

Corpus Rewriting and Implicit Graph Corrup-tion. Finally, we apply the perturbation function to the entire corpus. At the surface form level, any mention of e ∈ R τ for each document di is substituted with πτ (e). We explicitly do not mod-ify the ground-truth answers or queries. Conse-quently, while the corpus ˜C remains readable, the logical links supporting the ground truth are sev-ered. When a GraphRAG system builds its index on 

˜C and performs chunking, embedding, and graph extraction, it implicitly constructs a corrupted topol-ogy where valid reasoning paths are rerouted to in-correct entities, misleading the reasoning process. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setting Dataset. To evaluate the efficacy of L OGIC POI - 

> SON

in real scenarios, we align our experimen-tal setup with established protocols in SOTA GraphRAG research (Gutiérrez et al., 2024, 2025). We employ three widely adopted multi-hop QA benchmarks: HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), 2Wiki-MultihopQA (Ho et al., 2020), and MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022). These datasets represent a wide range of reasoning complexity, ranging from moderate to highly challenging tasks, and re-quire various graph-based reasoning abilities such as bridging entities and comparative analysis. Fol-lowing standard practices, we randomly sample 500 queries from the validation set of each bench-mark for evaluation, while strictly align the corpus and ground-truth defined in previous work. 

Baseline. We benchmark L OGIC POISON against PoisonedRAG, the state-of-the-art attack for RAG systems, as well as widely adopted adversar-ial methods for LLMs, including Naive Attack, Prompt Injection (Liu et al., 2024), GCG At-tack (Zou et al., 2023), and Disinformation (Du et al., 2022). The details of all baselines are pro-5vided in Appendix A.5. 

GraphRAG methods. To verify the robustness and universality of our attack across diverse archi-tectures, we conduct evaluations on three repre-sentative GraphRAG frameworks: (1) Microsoft GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2025), the pioneering im-plementation that popularized graph-based global retrieval; and (2) HippoRAG 2(Gutiérrez et al., 2025) and GFM-RAG (Luo et al., 2025), which rep-resent the current SOTA in the field. This selection allows us to assess vulnerabilities across different graph construction and reasoning paradigms. De-tails of each method are provided in the Appendix. 

Metrics. Consistent with prior work (Zou et al., 2025), we report the Attack Success Rate (ASR) based on substring inclusion. An attack is deemed successful if the ground truth string is absent from the model’s output. Recognizing that rigid string matching fails to capture semantic nuances (e.g., synonyms or structural changes), we additionally propose ASR-GPT. This metric leverages an LLM-as-a-judge paradigm to assess semantic equiva-lence. Given the triplet of (question, ground truth, prediction), the judge evaluates if the prediction conveys the same meaning as the ground truth. 

Implementation Details. All experiments were executed on the GeForce RTX 5090. For all meth-ods, we use Facebook/contriever as the embedding model. For the retrieval top-k parameters across different RAG methods, we set k = 10. For the top-

n% of targeted entities, we set n% = 5% . We use three different LLMs such as GPT-4o-mini (Ope-nAI et al., 2024), Llama-3.1-8B (Meta, 2024), and Qwen-3-32B (Yang et al., 2025) as base LLMs to verify the generality of the experimental results. 

5.2 Main Results 

Table 1 summarizes the attack performance. L OG -

> IC

POISON achieves SOTA ASR and ASR-G across all evaluated scenarios, significantly outperforming PoisonedRAG. The advantage is most evident in graph-centric systems like GraphRAG and GFM-RAG, where our topological rewiring strategy ef-fectively dismantles the logical connectivity es-sential for retrieval. While HippoRAG2 shows relative resilience due to its semantic safeguards, our method still achieves a higher success rate. Moreover, in scenarios requiring deep reasoning (MuSiQue), L OGIC POISON demonstrates domi-nant performance, verifying that logical corruption                                                                   

> LLM Attack Method GraphRAG GFM-RAG
> ASR ASR-G ASR ASR-G GPT-4o-mini Naive Attack 18.8 15.6 18.8 10.0 Prompt Injection 58.8 80.4 38.2 47.6 GCG Attack 19.6 21.6 19.2 9.6 Disinformation 54.6 75.0 42.0 51.4 LogicPoison 78.4 95.6 71.6 76.0
> Llama-3.1-8B Naive Attack 18.0 21.4 20.8 13.6 Prompt Injection 57.0 78.2 30.4 32.6 GCG Attack 19.8 16.8 20.4 12.4 Disinformation 53.6 70.4 42.4 43.2 LogicPoison 78.8 95.0 74.2 85.6
> Qwen-3-32B Naive Attack 19.0 17.2 19.4 7.2 Prompt Injection 59.0 83.4 50.0 64.0 GCG Attack 19.6 20.0 19.2 7.6 Disinformation 54.4 74.0 50.4 52.8 LogicPoison 78.6 93.2 71.4 79.8

Table 2: Attack Performance of L OGIC POISON and LLM attack methods on the 2Wiki Dataset across dif-ferent LLMs and RAG frameworks. 

is more potent than content injection for multi-hop tasks. Surprisingly, this advantage persists even in Naive RAG, indicating the broad applicability of entity-level logic poisoning. We further compare the effect difference be-tween L OGIC POISON and the traditional LLM attack method. Table 2 shows that L OGIC POI - 

> SON

shows significant advantages in different LLM models and GraphRAG methods. Specifically, Naive Attack and GCG Attack have poor perfor-mance. The core reason is that Naive texts and text suffixes are easy to be filtered in the graph construction stage. Prompt Injection has a cer-tain attack effect. The triple extraction process from GraphRAG usually relies on LLM, which may perform wrong triple extraction operations under the influence of injection prompt words. Dis-information has the possibility of being included in the Knowledge Graph by generating false infor-mation highly relevant to the query. However, on the whole, these traditional methods are far less ef-fective than L OGIC POISON , because they focus on unstructured text injection which is not designed for the topology destruction of KG. In addition, we also find that GFM-RAG shows a stronger de-fense ability against various attacks than Microsoft GraphRAG, which is because GFM regards KG as an intermediate state requiring inference and de-noising, and its performance depends more on the pre-trained GNN reasoning module. 

5.3 Efficiency Analysis 

In order to compare the efficiency of L OGIC POI - 

> SON

and PoisonedRAG, we evaluate it from three 6Method Time Token Injected Cost(s) Cost Tokens               

> PoisonedRAG 6607.3 593.6 296813 w/ Global 125.0 00w/ Query-Centric 1281.4 74.9 0
> LOGIC POISON 1406.4 74.9 0
> Table 3: Efficiency Analysis. Comparison of compu-tational time, token cost per query, and the length of injected content in the corpus between baselines and our variants. All results are averaged over the three datasets.

dimensions of time consumption, Token consump-tion and injection Token on three datasets. The results show that L OGIC POISON significantly out-performs the baseline method in all dimensions. Specifically, in terms of time consumption, Poi-sonedrag relies heavily on the large-scale genera-tion of LLM, which leads to its slow speed. The global phase of L OGIC POISON uses lightweight NER technology, which takes very low time. Al-though the query-centric part needs to extract bridge entities through LLM and consumes a cer-tain amount of time, the overall time is still 4 times faster than Poisonedrag. In terms of Token con-sumption, L OGIC POISON consumes only 1/8 of Poisonedrag, which significantly reduces the re-source overhead. In the dimension of injection Tokens, Poisonedrag inserts massive attack-related content into a single dataset, which makes it easy to be detected. L OGIC POISON eliminates the need to inject spurious content into the dataset, thus achiev-ing high concealment. 

5.4 Ablation Study 

To verify the effectiveness of each module, we conducted ablation experiments on three different LLM models and two GraphRAG methods. The experimental results, as shown in Figure 3, demon-strate that each module of L OGIC POISON exhibits significant effectiveness. Specifically, the Query-centric Logic Poison module identifies key entities for each query, effectively cutting off its logical rea-soning chain and contributing to a significant attack effect; the Global Logic Poison module, by weak-ening the Logic Hubs in the Knowledge Graph, severely undermines the overall logicality of the graph which does not rely on LLM or query con-tent, making it the preferred solution in scenarios with low costs and low data availability. The com-bination of the two forms L OGIC POISON , which ef-fectively integrates the aforementioned advantages: it not only disrupts the topological connections of the KG at a global level but also specifically inter-rupts the exclusive logical reasoning chain of each query, achieving the optimal attack effect. 

5.5 Potential Defenses 

Previous experiments have fully demonstrated the effectiveness of L OGIC POISON in attacking GraphRAG. In the following section, this paper will further explore potential defense mechanisms.                            

> Dataset System Standard w/ Paraphrasing ∆
> (No Def.) (Defense) HotpotQA GraphRAG 92.2 92.2 0GFM-RAG 78.0 77.8 -0.2 2Wiki GraphRAG 95.6 94.6 -1.0 GFM-RAG 76.0 75.6 -0.4 MuSiQue GraphRAG 97.0 96.2 -0.8 GFM-RAG 93.4 93.4 0
> Table 4: Defense Analysis. Robustness of L OGIC POI -
> SON against Query Paraphrasing defense across differ-ent datasets and GraphRAG systems. The LLM back-bone is fixed to GPT-4o-mini.

5.5.1 Query Paraphrasing 

Paraphrasing (Jain et al., 2023) is widely used to defend against prompt injection attacks (Liu et al., 2024, 2025; Pedro et al., 2025; Branch et al., 2022) and jailbreak attacks (Wei et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2024a) by large language models. Its core mecha-nism involves rewriting the query by LLM and then performing retrieval and generation tasks based on the rewritten query. We verified the defense effect of this strategy against L OGIC POISON , generating 5 rewritten versions for each query. The experi-mental results are shown in Table 4. The specific results indicate that Paraphrasing has almost no de-fense effect against L OGIC POISON . The decline in attack effectiveness caused by this strategy is always less than 1.0%. The main reason is that re-gardless of how the sentence structure of the query is rewritten, its core semantics remain unchanged, which will not affect the extraction results of key entities by L OGIC POISON , and thus has almost no impact on the overall attack effect. 

5.5.2 LLM Knowledge Referencing 

For the scenario of using GraphRAG, LLM itself cannot solve professional questions well, and a spe-cific knowledge base/KG is needed as the knowl-edge base. At the same time, the prompt of various graphrag will strictly limit the LLM to refer to the 7GPT-4o-mini Llama-3.1-8B Qwen-3-32B                

> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> ASR (%)
> 75.0
> 70.0
> 78.4
> 75.4
> 70.0
> 78.8
> 74.0
> 69.6
> 78.6
> GPT-4o-mini Llama-3.1-8B Qwen-3-32B
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> 68.4
> 62.8
> 71.6 71.4
> 60.6
> 74.2
> 69.8
> 61.2
> 71.4
> GPT-4o-mini Llama-3.1-8B Qwen-3-32B
> GraphRAG
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> ASR-G (%)
> 93.2 91.4
> 95.6 93.6 92.0
> 95.0
> 89.8
> 86.4
> 93.2
> GPT-4o-mini Llama-3.1-8B Qwen-3-32B
> GFM-RAG
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> 74.0 72.8
> 76.0
> 81.2
> 75.2
> 85.6
> 78.0 77.6 79.8
> Global Logic Poison Query-Centric Logic Poison LogicPoison (Full)

Figure 3: Ablation study of the components on the 2Wiki Dataset. We compare Global-only, Query-Centric-only, and the full LogicPoison strategies with three different LLMs. 

content retrieved from the knowledge base/KG dur-ing generation. These constraints greatly limit the defense effect of LLM Knowledge Referencing (re-lying on LLM internal knowledge) (Liang et al., 2025) against L OGIC POISON .0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

False Positive Rate 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> ROC (AUC = 0.57)
> Random

Figure 4: PPL-based detection for L OGIC POISON .

5.5.3 Poisoning Text Identification 

Perplexity (PPL) (Alon and Kamfonas, 2023) is widely used to measure text quality and also to defend against attacks on large language models. Previous studies have shown that a high perplexity of text indicates low quality, and poisoned texts often have a higher perplexity than texts written by humans, which makes poisoned texts very easy to detect. To verify this,following (Zou et al., 2025), we calculated the perplexity of clean texts and texts with entities replaced by L OGIC POISON (randomly sample 500 of each), respectively, using OpenAI’s 

tiktoken cl100k_base model for detection. As shown in Figure 4, the results show that the AUC value is 0.57, which is very close to the random guess benchmark of 0.5, indicating that the model is basically in a state of random judgment on poi-soned texts. This means that the poisoned texts generated by L OGIC POISON after entity replace-ment are almost indistinguishable from clean texts in terms of perplexity, making detection difficult. The core reason lies in the Type-Preserving Entity Swapping module proposed in this paper: all en-tity replacements maintain the consistency of types, ensuring that the fluency and semantic expression of sentences are not affected, thereby achieving effective evasion of detection mechanisms. 

6 Conclusion 

We found that existing LLM or RAG attack tech-niques cannot effectively attack the GraphRAG sys-tem. Through in-depth analysis of the GraphRAG system, we discovered that it is vulnerable to logic destruction attacks, so we proposed the L OGIC POI -

SON . This method constructs a unified candidate set by identifying logic hubs and key entities corre-sponding to queries. Based on cyclic permutation, we implement a comprehensive and covert attack on GraphRAG from both global and query-centric levels, which destroys its logical reasoning abil-ity. Under the experimental settings of three public datasets, three LLM models and three GraphRAG methods, L OGIC POISON shows excellent perfor-mance, and is significantly better than the SOTA in time and token cost. In addition, we explore and experimentally verify the effectiveness of potential defenses. This study provides important guidance for the security research in the GraphRAG field. 8Limitations 

While L OGIC POISON effectively exposes the topo-logical vulnerabilities of GraphRAG and demon-strates high efficacy across multiple benchmarks, we acknowledge certain limitations that point to directions for future research. 

Generalization to Dynamic Graph Construction. 

Our experiments focus on graph indices built from static corpora. Real-world GraphRAG systems may employ dynamic updating mechanisms where nodes are added or pruned in real-time. While the theoretical basis of logical poisoning remains valid, the persistence and stability of the attack un-der high-frequency graph updates warrant further empirical investigation. 

Linguistic Scope. The current evaluation is con-fined to English-language datasets. Although logi-cal reasoning is language-agnostic, implementing imperceptible entity swapping in languages with complex morphology or rich inflection requires tai-lored rewriting heuristics. We plan to extend our validation to multilingual GraphRAG settings in future work. 

Ethics Statement 

This work complies with the ACL Ethics Policy. We utilize three publicly available datasets: Hot-potQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA, and MuSiQue, which are widely established benchmarks in the research community. To the best of our knowledge, these datasets are free of personally identifiable informa-tion (PII) or offensive content. Our study involves neither human subject experimentation nor the col-lection of private user data. We acknowledge that the L OGIC POISON frame-work proposed in this paper demonstrates a method to compromise GraphRAG systems, which carries a potential risk of misuse. However, our primary motivation is defensive: by exposing the fragility of topological reasoning in GraphRAG, we aim to alert the community to these stealthy vulnerabil-ities. We believe that identifying such structural weaknesses is a prerequisite for developing more robust defense mechanisms and secure RAG sys-tems. All experiments were conducted in a con-trolled environment, and no poisoned data was re-leased into real-world applications. 

References 

Gabriel Alon and Michael Kamfonas. 2023. Detecting language model attacks with perplexity. Preprint ,arXiv:2308.14132. Anthropic. 2024. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Claude-3 Model Card .Hezekiah J. Branch, Jonathan Rodriguez Cefalu, Jeremy McHugh, Leyla Hujer, Aditya Bahl, Daniel del Castillo Iglesias, Ron Heichman, and Ramesh Dar-wishi. 2022. Evaluating the susceptibility of pre-trained language models via handcrafted adversarial examples. Preprint , arXiv:2209.02128. Pengzhou Cheng, Yidong Ding, Tianjie Ju, Zongru Wu, Wei Du, Ping Yi, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Gongshen Liu. 2024. Trojanrag: Retrieval-augmented genera-tion can be backdoor driver in large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2405.13401. Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Ying Zhang, Zefeng Li, Haoyu Wang, Tianwei Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2024a. Masterkey: Automated jailbreak-ing of large language model chatbots. In Proc. ISOC NDSS .Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Kailong Wang, Yuekang Li, Tian-wei Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2024b. Pandora: Jailbreak gpts by retrieval augmented generation poisoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2402.08416. Yibing Du, Antoine Bosselut, and Christopher D. Man-ning. 2022. Synthetic disinformation attacks on au-tomated fact verification systems. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence .Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. 2025. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. 

Preprint , arXiv:2404.16130. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforce-ment learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michi-hiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. 2024. Hipporag: Neu-robiologically inspired long-term memory for large language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Weijian Qi, Sizhe Zhou, and Yu Su. 2025. From rag to memory: 

9Non-parametric continual learning for large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Keegan Hines, Gary Lopez, Matthew Hall, Federico Zarfati, Yonatan Zunger, and Emre Kiciman. 2024. Defending against indirect prompt injection attacks with spotlighting. Preprint , arXiv:2403.14720. Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-ference on Computational Linguistics , pages 6609– 6625, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Com-mittee on Computational Linguistics. Neel Jain, Avi Schwarzschild, Yuxin Wen, Gowthami Somepalli, John Kirchenbauer, Ping yeh Chiang, Micah Goldblum, Aniruddha Saha, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. 2023. Baseline defenses for ad-versarial attacks against aligned language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2309.00614. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Jiacheng Liang, Yuhui Wang, Changjiang Li, Rongyi Zhu, Tanqiu Jiang, Neil Gong, and Ting Wang. 2025. Graphrag under fire. Preprint , arXiv:2501.14050. Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Zi-hao Wang, Xiaofeng Wang, Tianwei Zhang, Yepang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yan Zheng, Leo Yu Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2025. Prompt injection attack against llm-integrated applications. Preprint , arXiv:2306.05499. Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Runpeng Geng, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. 2024. Formalizing and bench-marking prompt injection attacks and defenses. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd USENIX Conference on Se-curity Symposium , SEC ’24, USA. USENIX Associ-ation. Linhao Luo, Zicheng Zhao, Gholamreza Haffari, Dinh Phung, Chen Gong, and Shirui Pan. 2025. GFM-RAG: Graph foundation model for retrieval aug-mented generation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Meta. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.21783. OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛ adry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, and 401 others. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. Preprint , arXiv:2410.21276. Rodrigo Pedro, Daniel Castro, Paulo Carreira, and Nuno Santos. 2025. From prompt injections to sql injection attacks: How protected is your llm-integrated web application? Preprint , arXiv:2308.01990. Boci Peng, Yun Zhu, Yongchao Liu, Xiaohe Bo, Haizhou Shi, Chuntao Hong, Yan Zhang, and Siliang Tang. 2024. Graph retrieval-augmented generation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921 .Avital Shafran, Roei Schuster, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2025. Machine against the rag: jamming retrieval-augmented generation with blocker documents. In 

Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Conference on Se-curity Symposium , SEC ’25, USA. USENIX Associ-ation. Daniel Spielman. 2012. Spectral graph theory. Combi-natorial scientific computing , 18(18). Xuchen Suo. 2024. Signed-prompt: A new approach to prevent prompt injection attacks against llm-integrated applications. AIP Conference Proceedings ,3194(1):040013. Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. Musique: Multi-hop questions via single-hop question composition. 

Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics , 10:539–554. Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gard-ner, and Sameer Singh. 2019. Universal adversarial triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceed-ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2153–2162, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2023. Jailbroken: How does LLM safety training fail? In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems .Yilin Xiao, Junnan Dong, Chuang Zhou, Su Dong, Qian wen Zhang, Di Yin, Xing Sun, and Xiao Huang. 2025. Graphrag-bench: Challenging domain-specific rea-soning for evaluating graph retrieval-augmented gen-eration. Preprint , arXiv:2506.02404. Yilin Xiao, Chuang Zhou, Qinggang Zhang, Bo Li, Qing Li, and Xiao Huang. 2026a. Reliable reasoning path: Distilling effective guidance for llm reasoning with knowledge graphs. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-edge and Data Engineering , 38(4):2380–2393. Yilin Xiao, Chuang Zhou, Yujing Zhang, Qinggang Zhang, Su Dong, Shengyuan Chen, Chang Yang, and Xiao Huang. 2026b. Lag: Logic-augmented generation from a cartesian perspective. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.05509. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, 

10 Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Chang Yang, Chuang Zhou, Yilin Xiao, Su Dong, Luyao Zhuang, Yujing Zhang, Zhu Wang, Zijin Hong, Zheng Yuan, Zhishang Xiang, and 1 others. 2026. Graph-based agent memory: Taxonomy, techniques, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05665 .Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-pher D. Manning. 2018. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Yiding Liu, Yue Xing, Han Xu, Jie Ren, Yi Chang, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2024. The good and the bad: Exploring privacy issues in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 4505–4524, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qinggang Zhang, Shengyuan Chen, Yuanchen Bei, Zheng Yuan, Huachi Zhou, Zijin Hong, Junnan Dong, Hao Chen, Yi Chang, and Xiao Huang. 2025. Asurvey of graph retrieval-augmented generation for customized large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13958 .Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrik-son. 2023. Universal and transferable adversar-ial attacks on aligned language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2307.15043. Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. 2025. {PoisonedRAG }: Knowledge corruption attacks to {Retrieval-Augmented } generation of large language models. In 34th USENIX Security Sympo-sium (USENIX Security 25) , pages 3827–3844. 

11 A Appendix 

A.1 Analysis of the graph-based architecture 

Unlike traditional RAG, which relies on similar-ity in vector space to retrieve static text chunks, GraphRAG fundamentally operates as a topologi-cal reasoning engine. Its core advantage does not lie in merely accumulating knowledge triples, but in being able to perform transitive reasoning be-tween these triples. Specifically, GraphRAG systems synthesize an-swers using graph traversal algorithms (e.g., multi-hop pathfinding) and structural aggregation mech-anisms (e.g., community detection via the Leiden algorithm). In this architecture, the value of a piece of information depends on its connectivity. For ex-ample, answering a complex query often requires traversing specific inferential bridges. If a seman-tic bridge is topologically disconnected or routed incorrectly, the system cannot connect premises to conclusions even if both entities are intact in the database. Thus, the robustness of GraphRAG depends on structural integrity rather than data volume. This architectural dependency exposes a critical vulner-ability: logic is fragile. While vector retrieval degrades moderately under noise (retrieved text chunks are slightly less relevant), GraphRAG’s in-ference chains are prone to catastrophic failures when critical hub nodes or bridge edges are dam-aged. Replacing a key entity in the inference chain not only introduces factual errors but also disrupts the entire reasoning process, preventing the re-trieval mechanism from identifying the correct con-text. This insight shifts the attack target from inject-ing large amounts of false information (flooding attacks) to subtly reconstructing logic (reconnec-tion attacks), which also prompts us to propose the LOGIC POISON framework. 

A.2 Theoretical Analysis of logic hub A.2.1 Hub Nodes and Connectivity Disruption 

Real-world graphs, including social networks, in-formation networks, and knowledge graphs con-structed from large-scale corpora, often exhibit scale-free properties. In such networks, node de-grees follow a heavy-tailed distribution rather than a homogeneous distribution. Formally, the proba-bility that a node has degree k is given by: 

P (k) ∝ k−γ , γ ∈ (2 , 3) , (9) where a small fraction of nodes, referred to as hub nodes, possess dominantly high degrees, while most of nodes maintain sparse connectivity. A fundamental result in network science is that scale-free networks are robust to random failures but highly vulnerable to targeted attacks. Random node removal predominantly affects low-degree nodes and therefore preserves the giant connected component. In contrast, selectively removing or perturbing hub nodes can drastically impair global connectivity. Besides, hub nodes play a central role in shortest-path routing and information flow. Their removal significantly increases the average shortest path length and graph diameter, thereby degrading multi-hop information propagation. Prior theoret-ical and empirical studies have shown that elimi-nating only a small fraction of the highest-degree nodes can lead to disproportionate degradation of global network efficiency. This behavior is commonly analyzed through percolation theory, where the existence of a giant connected component depends on the ratio: 

κ = ⟨k2⟩⟨k⟩ . (10) For scale-free networks with γ ≤ 3, the second moment ⟨k2⟩ diverges, resulting in a vanishing per-colation threshold under random failures. However, targeted attacks on hub nodes sharply reduce ⟨k2⟩,driving the network below the critical threshold and causing abrupt fragmentation. 

A.2.2 Node Centrality Metrics 

To quantitatively characterize the importance of entities in a graph, we adopt classical centrality measures from network science that capture com-plementary aspects of node influence. Degree cen-trality measures the number of direct connections of a node, formally defined as CD(v) = deg( v), re-flecting its local prominence and immediate aggre-gation capacity; in GraphRAG-style entity graphs, nodes with high degree centrality typically cor-respond to frequently mentioned or semantically generic entities that serve as global connectors. In contrast, betweenness centrality quantifies the ex-tent to which a node lies on shortest paths between other nodes, defined as CB (v) = P  

> s̸=v̸=tσst (v)
> σst

,where σst denotes the number of shortest paths between nodes s and t and σst (v) those passing through v; such nodes act as structural bridges that mediate information flow and multi-hop rea-soning. Finally, closeness centrality, defined as 12 CC (v) = 

P 

> u̸=v

d(v, u )

−1

, captures how close a node is to all others in terms of shortest-path distance, reflecting its ability to rapidly access or disseminate information across the graph. Together, these metrics provide a quantitative basis for iden-tifying nodes that are critical to global connectivity, efficient information propagation, and reasoning path composition. 

A.2.3 Spectral View of Frequent Entities 

From the perspective of spectral graph theory, the global connectivity and information propagation properties of a graph are governed by the spec-trum of its adjacency or Laplacian matrix. Let 

G = ( V, E ) denote the entity graph induced from a corpus, and let A ∈ R|V |×| V | be its adjacency matrix. The largest eigenvalue λmax (A) and the as-sociated leading eigenvector play a dominant role in characterizing diffusion dynamics, aggregation behavior, and global structural coherence. In heterogeneous graphs, particularly those with scale-free characteristics, the leading eigenvalue is disproportionately influenced by high-degree nodes. Classical results in spectral graph theory in-dicate that the spectral radius scales with the square root of the maximum degree: 

λmax (A) ≈ max 

> v∈V

pdeg( v), (11) suggesting that nodes with large degrees exert a dominant influence on the spectral radius. More-over, the mass of the leading eigenvector tends to lo-calize around hub nodes, a phenomenon known as eigenvector localization, implying that these nodes dominate global signal propagation. In corpus-induced entity graphs, explicit degree information is often unavailable prior to graph con-struction. However, under standard co-occurrence-based graph formation, the expected degree of an entity is monotonically related to its corpus-level frequency. Let f (e) denote the document frequency of entity e.

E[deg( e)] ∝ f (e), (12) Consequently, high-frequency entities are ex-pected to dominate the eigenspace of the induced graph, which motivates the use of corpus-level fre-quency as a practical substitute for spectral dom-inance. Attacking or perturbing such entities in-duces a low-rank perturbation to the adjacency matrix. Let ˜A = A + ∆ A denote the perturbed adjacency matrix after poisoning a small set of high-frequency entities. The First-order matrix per-turbation theory yields the following. 

∆λmax ≈ u⊤∆Au, (13) where u is the leading eigenvector of A. Since u

concentrates its mass on hub nodes, perturbations targeting these nodes produce disproportionately large shifts in λmax . Such spectral shifts degrade global diffusion efficiency and destroy multi-hop information aggregation in an efficient manner. Taken together, these results imply that poison-ing high-frequency entities constitutes a spectrally efficient attack strategy: by targeting a small num-ber of entities that dominate the leading eigenspace, the attack induces global structural degradation with minimal perturbation budget. This provides a theoretical explanation for why corpus-level frequency-based attacks can effectively disrupt rea-soning in GraphRAG systems without requiring explicit access to the full graph topology. 

A.3 Algorithm Workflow 

Algorithm 1 details the execution pipeline of the LOGIC POISON framework. The process operates in three phases: (1) Target Selection, where global logic hubs and query-centric bridges are identi-fied; (2) Permutation Construction, where a type-preserving cyclic mapping is defined for the unified target set; and (3) Corpus Rewriting, which gener-ates poisoned corpus ˜C to induce graph corruption. 

A.4 Details of GraphRAG methods 

Here we introduce the graphrag methods chosen in this paper in detail: 

GraphRAG. Microsoft GraphRAG proposes a hierarchical community summarization strategy based on knowledge graph. This method constructs a knowledge graph by extracting entities and rela-tions through LLM, and then generates a structured summary through hierarchical community detec-tion. Finally, map-reduce mode is used to integrate partial responses of each community to generate a global answer. The innovation of this method is that it combines the modularity of graph with sum-mary generation, and supports global queries on millions of token corpora. It is significantly better than the traditional vector RAG in the comprehen-siveness and diversity of answers, and provides an efficient solution for the global sense-making task of large-scale private corpora. 13 Algorithm 1 LOGIC POISON Attack Workflow 

Input : Clean Corpus C, Query Set Q, Entity Types 

T , Poison Budget n%.

Output : Poisoned Corpus ˜C. 

> 1:

Initialize target pools: G ← ∅ , Qpool ← ∅ ,

R ← ∅ ; 

> 2:

{Phase 1: Global Logic Poisoning } 

> 3:

for document di ∈ C do  

> 4:

Extract typed entities E(di) using NER;  

> 5:

Update frequency counts f (e, τ ); 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

for type τ ∈ T do  

> 8:

Select top-n% frequent entities as Gτ ; 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

G ← S 

> τ

Gτ ; 

> 11:

{Phase 2: Query-Centric Logic Poisoning } 

> 12:

for query qj ∈ Q do  

> 13:

Extract reasoning chain entities Eqj via LLM CoT;  

> 14:

Filter Eqj against corpus inventory to get valid set Ecorpus  

> qj

; 

> 15:

Qpool ← Q pool ∪ Ecorpus  

> qj

; 

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

{Phase 3: Unified Swapping Mechanism } 

> 18:

R ← G ∪ Q pool ; {Combine global and query-specific targets}  

> 19:

for type τ ∈ T do  

> 20:

Extract subset Rτ from R where type is τ ; 

> 21:

Sort Rτ to form sequence Sτ ; 

> 22:

Construct cyclic permutation function πτ :

Sτ [i] → Sτ [i − 1] ; 

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

{Phase 4: Corpus Rewriting } 

> 25:

˜C ← ∅ ; 

> 26:

for document di ∈ C do  

> 27:

˜di ← di; 

> 28:

for entity e ∈ R do  

> 29:

Replace all mentions of e in ˜di with 

πtype (e)(e); 

> 30:

end for  

> 31:

˜C.append ( ˜di); 

> 32:

end for  

> 33:

return Poisoned Corpus ˜C.

GFM-RAG. In order to solve the problems of noisy graph structure, incompleteness and lack of model generality in GraphRAG, GFM-RAG pro-poses the first Graph-based model (GFM) suitable for retrieval enhancement generation. The model takes query dependency graph neural network as the core, and through two-stage training (unsuper-vised knowledge graph completion pre-training and supervised document retrieval fine-tuning), it learns general reasoning patterns on large-scale data con-taining 60 knowledge graphs and 700k documents, and can directly adapt to unseen data sets without fine-tuning. Its innovative single-step multi-hop in-ference mechanism significantly improves the per-formance of complex reasoning tasks while ensur-ing efficiency, and conforms to the neural scaling law, which provides a basis for subsequent model expansion. 

HippoRAG 2. Aiming at the problem of perfor-mance degradation of existing structure enhanced RAG methods in fact memory tasks, HippoRAG 2 is based on a neurobiologically inspired long-term memory framework and inherits the core of HippoRAG’s personalized PageRank algorithm. Through the optimization of deep paragraph inte-gration, deep association between query and knowl-edge graph triples, and LLM online identification of irrelevant triples, the problem of context loss and semantic matching caused by the entity-centric method is solved. We have carefully selected these three most rep-resentative graphrag methods as part of the exper-iment. Due to the huge resource consumption of graphrag methods, we were unable to include more other excellent graphrag methods. In future, we will consider expanding the scope of the experi-ments. 

A.5 Details of Baselines 

Here we introduce the baselines chosen in this pa-per in detail: 

PoisonedRAG. PoisonedRAG is the first knowl-edge pollution attack framework against RAG. This work reveals for the first time that the knowledge base of RAG systems can be used as a practical at-tack surface to induce LLMS to generate incorrect answers preset by attackers for specific target ques-tions by injecting a small amount of malicious text. Its core innovation lies in deriving and satisfying two necessary conditions for the attack: retrieval condition (malicious text can be retrieved by the 14 target question) and generation condition (mali-cious text can mislead the LLM to output the target answer). 

Naive Attack. Following the baseline (Zou et al., 2025), we define Naive Attack as: Given a question, treat the question itself as malicious text because it has a high probability of being retrieved. 

Prompt Injection. Prompt Injection (Liu et al., 2024) is a kind of security attack against Large Language Model integration applications. The core of prompt injection is that the attacker can inject malicious instructions or data by manipulating the external input data of the application, and induce the LLM to ignore the original task instructions and execute the injection task preset by the attacker, so as to produce the attacker’s expected results. 

GCG Attack. By combining greedy search and gradient-directed discrete optimization strategies, GCG Attack (Zou et al., 2023) automatically gen-erates adversarial suffixed, which can efficiently induce aligned LLMS to output harmful content. The core innovations of this method are as follows: first, the model is guided into harmful generation mode by optimizing the target text prefix without manual intervention; Second, it supports multi-hint and multi-model joint optimization, and the gen-erated adversarial suffix has strong versatility and transferability, which can successfully attack GPT-4, Bard and other black-box commercial models and open source LLMs. 

Disinformation. PoisonedRAG generates the ba-sis content of the attack text through the prompt designed for the target problem, which can be re-garded as disinformation (Du et al., 2022). There-fore, we compare with this baseline, which can be seen as a variant of PoisonedRAG. 

A.6 Hyperparameter analysis 

LOGIC POISON contains only one hyperparameter, which is the top-n% in the Global Logic Poison module. To select the smallest value that balances effectiveness and efficiency, we conducted a hy-perparameter sensitivity analysis based on Naive RAG(since the cost of repeating experiments mul-tiple times on the GraphRAG method is extremely high) under the setting of retrieval top-k=5. All Attack Success Rate results are the average of 5 independent tests on 3 datasets. The experimental results show that when n% exceeds 5%, the im-provement in ASR tends to level off. Therefore, we 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10   

> Top-n%
> 86
> 88
> 90
> 92
> 94
> Average ASR
> 86.6
> 89.9
> 90.8
> 92.6 92.8
> Figure 5: Hyperparameter analysis results of L OG -
> IC POISON .

finally chose top-n%=5% as the hyperparameter, which achieves the optimal balance between attack effect and resource cost. 

A.7 Prompts 

In this section, we present the prompt templates that drive the components of our method. Figure 7 illustrates the entity extraction prompt, which enforces strict constraints to isolate minimal rea-soning hops and classify entities (including implicit bridges). Additionally, Figure 6 shows the evalu-ation prompt used to verify the ASR-GPT of the final answers, ensuring robustness against format-ting variations. 15 ASR-GPT Evaluation Prompt 

You are an expert judge evaluating if a model’s prediction exactly matches the correct answer. 

Question: 

<Question> 

Prediction: 

<Prediction> 

Correct answer: 

<Correct Answer> 

Task: Determine if the prediction exactly matches the correct answer. Consider: • The prediction must contain the same core information as the correct answer. • Minor formatting differences (punctuation, capitalization, spacing) should be ignored. • The prediction should convey the same meaning as the correct answer. Respond with only "YES" or "NO" (no other text). 

Figure 6: Prompt template used for evaluating exact matches between predictions and gold answers. 

Entity Extraction Prompt 

Extract the reasoning-critical entities from the multi-hop question Q. 

Your constraints: 

• Do NOT answer Q. • Do NOT add external knowledge. • Use ONLY the wording of Q. • Identify the minimal reasoning hops (1, 2, 3. . . ). • For each hop, extract only entities necessary for the reasoning chain. 

Entity types: Use spaCy’s NER label set when applicable: “PERSON”, “NORP”, “FAC”, “ORG”, “GPE”, “LOC”, “PRODUCT”, “EVENT”, “WORK_OF_ART”, “LAW”, “LANGUAGE”, “DATE”, “TIME”, “PERCENT”, “MONEY”, “QUANTITY”, “ORDINAL”, “CARDINAL”. Additionally allow two reasoning-specific types: • “ALIAS”: paraphrased or descriptive label referring to an entity (e.g., “the nation called the nobilities common-wealth”) • “BRIDGE”: implicit descriptive entity needed to connect reasoning hops (e.g., “the country where the operatives originated”) 

Guidelines: 

• Include implicit bridge entities (BRIDGE) and alias-style descriptions (ALIAS) if they are part of the reasoning chain. • Do NOT normalize entities to real-world names. • Focus only on entities whose presence or value matters for understanding or resolving the question. 

Output format (strict): A Python-style list of dicts, e.g.: 

[{"hop": 1, "entity": "...", "type": "GPE"}, {"hop": 2, "entity": "...", "type": "BRIDGE"}, {"hop": 3, "entity": "...", "type": "DATE"} ]

Return ONLY the list. 

Q: <Question Text> 

Figure 7: Prompt template for reasoning-critical entity extraction. 

16