Title: Long-Horizon Plan Execution in Large Tool Spaces through Entropy-Guided Branching

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12126v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 00:22:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Long-Horizon Plan Execution in Large Tool Spaces through Entropy-Guided Branching 

Rongzhe Wei 1,2, Ge Shi 2, Min Cheng 2, Na Zhang 2,Pan Li 1, Sarthak Ghosh 2, Vaibhav Gorde 2, Leman Akoglu 21Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Amazon 

{rongzhew, gegshi, mmcheng, naazhang, ghossart, gordev, lakoglu}@amazon.com panli@gatech.edu 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have signif-icantly advanced tool-augmented agents, en-abling autonomous reasoning via API inter-actions. However, executing multi-step tasks within massive tool libraries remains challeng-ing due to two critical bottlenecks: (1) the ab-sence of rigorous, plan-level evaluation frame-works and (2) the computational demand of exploring vast decision spaces, stemming from large toolsets and long-horizon planning. To bridge these gaps, we first introduce SLATE 

(Synthetic Large-scale API Toolkit for E-commerce), a large-scale context-aware bench-mark designed for the automated assessment of tool-integrated agents. Unlike static metrics, 

SLATE accommodates diverse yet functionally valid execution trajectories, revealing that cur-rent agents struggle with self-correction and search efficiency. Motivated by these findings, we next propose Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB), an uncertainty-aware search algorithm that dynamically expands decision branches where predictive entropy is high. EGB op-timizes the exploration-exploitation trade-off, significantly enhancing both task success rates and computational efficiency. Extensive ex-periments on SLATE demonstrate that our dual contribution provides a robust foundation for developing reliable and scalable LLM agents in tool-rich environments. 

1 Introduction 

The rapid progress of LLMs has substantially en-hanced the reasoning and decision-making capa-bilities of AI agents (Wang et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2025), enabling them to au-tonomously interact with external tools and APIs to solve real-world tasks (Yao et al., 2023b; Shinn et al., 2023). These tool-augmented LLM agents demonstrate significant potential for automating complex workflows across diverse domains, in-cluding e-commerce (Yao et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024), software development (Hong et al., 2023), scientific discovery (Boiko et al., 2023), and em-bodied AI (Ahn et al., 2024). Despite this potential, the transition toward context-grounded, long-horizon tool-use planning reveals a significant performance gap. In these sophisticated scenarios, agents are required to navi-gate massive tool libraries and execute multi-step plans that involve intricate dependencies (Qin et al., 2023). We argue that the development of robust tool-use agents is primarily bottlenecked by two in-tertwined challenges. The first is the absence of rig-orous, plan-level evaluation frameworks capable of assessing agents in high-complexity settings with diverse trajectories and deterministic outcome rules for scoring (Qu et al., 2025). The second challenge stems from the limitations of existing agentic meth-ods in navigating the vast decision spaces inherent to these tasks, which often results in computational inefficiency and reduced autonomy (Huang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2025). The first challenge lies in evaluation. Current benchmarks are inadequate, primarily in two re-spects. Many employ limited toolsets that do not reflect the scale or diversity of real-world applica-tions (Yao et al., 2022, 2024a; Shridhar et al., 2020). Conversely, benchmarks that do incorporate large tool libraries often assess only single-step tool invo-cation, neglecting the sequential dependencies cru-cial for multi-step task execution (Tang et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a). Furthermore, attempts at plan-level evaluation frequently depend on subjective LLM-as-a-judge assessments (Qin et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024), which cannot reli-ably measure an agent’s true end-to-end task com-pletion capabilities. This is especially problematic as such methods may penalize valid, alternative solution paths (for instance, those with redundant but harmless tool calls or different but effective ex-ecution orders), thereby failing to capture a holistic view of agent proficiency. Complementary to the evaluation gap, the sec-1  

> arXiv:2604.12126v1 [cs.AI] 13 Apr 2026 Figure 1: Overview of the Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB) framework. Phase 1 iterates over a fixed plan, using an entropy estimation module (black-box sampling or white-box logit-based) to quantify tool selection uncertainty at each step and execute the majority-voted tool. If the final output does not match the reference, Phase 2 branches at high-entropy steps in descending order, substituting alternative tools from the Phase 1 vote distribution and re-executing downstream steps with updated observations. Tool execution results are produced by a deterministic simulator to enable exact-match success evaluation.

ond challenge pertains to the intrinsic limitations of current agentic algorithms in navigating expansive decision spaces. While foundational methods like ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) and self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023) integrate reason-ing with environmental feedback, they often strug-gle to systematically explore the solution space of long-horizon tasks. To address this, an alternative line of research treats the reasoning process as ex-plicit planning by employing search algorithms to navigate decision trees (Koh et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025). Prominent among these are methods based on Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which aim to balance exploration and exploitation in decision-making (Zhou et al., 2023; Murthy et al., 2023; Herr et al., 2025). However, the efficacy of these search-based approaches is frequently hindered by prohibitive computational costs, especially in sce-narios involving large toolsets and long planning horizons. Consequently, despite ongoing efforts to optimize this trade-off, current methods lack the efficiency and reliability required for practical de-ployment in complex environments. We address these intertwined deficiencies by in-troducing a rigorous evaluation framework and a principled search strategy for tool-augmented agents. We first present SLATE (Synthetic Large-scale API Toolkit for E-commerce), a large-scale, context-aware benchmark for objective plan-level evaluation. Each SLATE instance consists of a query, an executable plan, and an associated toolset, supported by context-grounded simulation outputs for valid invocations and explicit default outputs for invalid ones, enabling automated end-to-end evaluation at scale while accommodating trajectory diversity. Leveraging SLATE , we conduct a sys-tematic study of representative agent architectures, revealing three key findings: (1) agents struggle to self-correct under binary execution feedback in large action spaces; (2) execution history improves tool and argument selection but has limited influ-ence on the decision of whether to invoke a tool; (3) existing search-based methods, particularly MCTS-based approaches, exhibit an unfavorable utility-to-computation trade-off in long-horizon set-tings. Motivated by these insights, we propose Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB, see Fig. 1), an uncertainty-aware search algorithm that selectively allocates computation by branching only when pre-dictive entropy over tool choices is high, while fol-lowing a greedy path under confidence. This adap-tive strategy improves the exploration–exploitation balance, reducing unnecessary search overhead and increasing end-to-end task success. Together, 

SLATE , our empirical diagnosis, and EGB estab-lish a more rigorous foundation for reliable LLM agents operating in long-horizon tasks. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Benchmarks and Evaluation Frameworks for Tool Use in LLMs 

Existing benchmarks for tool-augmented language models primarily fall into two categories. The first includes small-scale environments such as τ -2BENCH (Yao et al., 2024a) and A LF WORLD (Shrid-har et al., 2020), where the tool or action space is limited to a few dozen predefined options. While these settings support controlled evalua-tions of decision-making and action selection, they lack the scale and complexity required to assess general-purpose agents operating over realistic tool libraries. The second category comprises benchmarks designed for large-scale tool selection (Huang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2023). These benchmarks typically rely either on step-level metrics (e.g., tool awareness, retrieval accuracy) or on proxy signals for plan-level evalu-ation, most commonly subjective judgments from LLM judges. However, they do not adequately account for end-to-end execution correctness on long-horizon plans, which is essential. To make this gap explicit, Table 1 compares existing benchmarks along four complementary properties. Large Tool Spaces (1,000+ tools) cap-tures step-wise tool-selection difficulty, while Long-Horizon Execution (10+ steps) captures plan-level execution complexity. Step-wise Deterministic Out-comes indicates whether correct tool-argument in-vocations produce deterministic outputs that can be reliably propagated to later steps. Plan-Level Grounded Evaluation indicates whether each case is grounded with sufficient state information to support deterministic final-state verification. As shown in Table 1, no prior benchmark satisfies all four properties simultaneously. SLATE is de-signed to fill this exact gap by combining all four properties. In particular, plan-level grounded eval-uation in SLATE checks whether the final execu-tion state matches the ground-truth resolution, even when intermediate tool choices differ from the ref-erence trajectory. This evaluation protocol reflects practical deployments, where multiple APIs can have overlapping functionality and distinct tool sequences can still yield the same correct final out-come. 

2.2 Reasoning and Search in Tool-Augmented Agents 

Research on LLM agents has transitioned from elic-iting internal reasoning to navigating complex inter-actions with external tools. Early techniques such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) and Self-Consistency (SC) (Wang et al., 2022) estab-lished foundational reasoning capabilities. These were later extended via structured search methods such as Tree-of-Thought (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a) and Reasoning via Planning (RAP) (Hao et al., 2023) to explore diverse cognitive paths. A distinct line of research grounds agent deci-sions in external environments. The ReAct frame-work (Yao et al., 2023b) pioneered the interleav-ing of reasoning with tool execution, a paradigm later refined by mechanisms for self-refinement (Madaan et al., 2023) and reflective feedback (Shinn et al., 2023) that enable agents to learn from historical errors and environmental observations. As tool libraries scale, tool selection is increas-ingly framed as a formal search problem. Meth-ods such as LATS (Zhou et al., 2023) and REX (Murthy et al., 2023) adapt classical algorithms like Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to guide agents through multi-step decision spaces. How-ever, the prohibitive computational cost of near-exhaustive exploration in long-horizon tasks re-mains a critical bottleneck. This tension between search completeness and efficiency motivates our development of Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB), an adaptive and uncertainty-aware search strategy. While Li et al. (Li et al., 2026b) also use entropy-gated branching, they study pure test-time reason-ing where token-level entropy controls beam ex-pansion during chain-of-thought generation. In contrast, our EGB operates in an interactive tool-use setting: entropy is defined over tool-selection distributions, and branching/backtracking is guided by execution-grounded outcomes at the step level. 

3 SLATE Dataset Construction 

To address the limitations of existing benchmarks, we introduce SLATE by grounding its construction in comprehensive planning-trajectory factual con-texts. This section details the development of the 

SLATE dataset, which is specifically engineered to reflect the complexities of real-world e-commerce scenarios. These environments naturally require long-horizon reasoning across intricate dependen-cies, such as comparative shopping or inventory-aware checkout processes (Yao et al., 2022; Shrid-har et al., 2020). Furthermore, tasks in this domain typically operate over expansive API libraries that span diverse functionalities ranging from product retrieval to logistics management, which provides a realistic testbed for agent scalability in large de-cision spaces (Qin et al., 2023; Qu et al., 2025). The resulting dataset comprises user queries paired with multi-step solution plans, precise 3Table 1: Comprehensive Comparison of Agent Tool-Call Datasets.                                                        

> Benchmark Large Tool Spaces (1,000+ Tools) Long-Horizon Execution (10+ Steps) Step-wise Deterministic Outcomes Plan-Level Grounded Evaluation SLATE (Ours) ✓✓✓✓
> TRAJECT-Bench (He et al., 2025) ✓✓✓×
> Toolathlon (Li et al., 2026a) ×✓✓✓
> ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2023) ✓×✓×
> Gorilla (Patil et al., 2024) ✓×✓×
> UltraTool (Huang et al., 2024) ✓×××
> τ-bench (Yao et al., 2024b) ×✓×✓
> τ2-Bench (Barres et al., 2025) ×✓✓✓
> ACEBench (Chen et al., 2025) ✓×✓×
> HammerBench (Wang et al., 2025) ✓×✓✓
> ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025) ×✓×✓
> MetaTool (Huang et al., 2023) ××××
> API-Bank (Li et al., 2023b) ✓×✓✓

Figure 2: Illustration of the SLATE dataset structure. 

tool annotations, and simulated execution results for each intermediate step. By providing these grounded execution traces, SLATE facilitates a rig-orous assessment of tool-augmented LLM agents, supporting both step-wise verification and end-to-end plan-level evaluation at scale. Our construction pipeline consists of the following stages: query col-lection, plan generation, tool annotation and nor-malization, plan refinement, tool simulation, and manual post-processing. This systematic workflow ensures that each trajectory is both logically sound and executionally valid. Detailed prompt designs for each stage are provided in App. D. 

3.1 Definition 

Let D = ( Q, P, T , S) denote the SLATE dataset, where Q = {q1, q 2, . . . , q n} is a set of n com-plex user queries, P = {p1, p 2, . . . , p n} is the corresponding set of structured, hierarchical plans (Huang et al., 2024), T = {t1, t 2, . . . , t m}

is a library of m tools, and S is a context-aware tool simulator. Each query qi ∈ Q is a natural language instruction representing a complex task. Its associated plan pi ∈ P

is represented as a sequence of triplets pi =[( hs 1, ss 1,1, tool 1,1), . . . , (hs k, ss k,l , tool k,l )] ,where hs i denotes a high-level step (e.g., “i”), written in natural language and describing an intermediate subgoal, while ss i,j denotes a finer-grained substep (e.g., “i,j”) that may invoke a tool calling tool i,j ∈ T or indicate “No Tool Required.” Each tool t ∈ T is defined in function-call format as t(arg 1, arg 2, . . . ), with arguments specified at runtime. Since directly implementing all tools within a large-scale interactive environment is of-ten infeasible, SLATE incorporates a simulator S to approximate the behavior of tool executions. The simulator is designed to generate coherent outputs for each tool call conditioned on the input query and the plan context, thereby enabling consistent and interpretable execution traces. This simulation mechanism plays a crucial role in supporting plan-level evaluation: unlike prior benchmarks that rely on LLM-as-a-judge assessments or isolated step-wise accuracy, our simulator allows objective, automated measurement of end-to-end plan success. Fig. 2 illustrates the dataset structure, and Table 2 gives summary statistics. 

Table 2: SLATE Dataset Statistics       

> Total Tools 1000 Relevant Tools in Plans 253
> Avg. Arguments/Tool 3.05 Avg. Calls/Tool 6.30

3.2 Query Collection 

To ensure that the SLATE dataset captures realis-tic tool-use demands, we focus on domains that inherently require large-scale tool invocation. We select the e-commerce domain as our target setting due to its diverse and interdependent task structure involving frequent interactions between buyers and sellers. This domain naturally necessitates the coor-dination of numerous APIs and tool calls, making it an ideal testbed for evaluating tool-augmented language agents. To balance diversity and topical coherence, we design the query set to cover a broad spectrum of task types while maintaining internal consistency across scenarios. Specifically, we collaborate with 4domain experts to define 12 representative task cat-egories: Product Management, Inventory Manage-ment, Order Processing, Shipping & Fulfillment, Pricing & Promotions, Subscription Management, Customer Service, Returns & Refunds, Analytics & Reporting, Catalog Management, Review Manage-ment , and Miscellaneous . For each instance, we randomly select a category and employ Claude 3.7 to generate and progressively complicate the query, ensuring both linguistic richness and operational complexity. The prompt template used for gener-ation is provided in Appendix D, with illustrative examples shown in Appendix A. Fig. 3 shows the distribution of tools over the categories. SLATE 

> Tool Library
> 26.7%
> 10.5%
> 9.5%
> 9.0%
> 8.9%
> 6.2%
> 5.6%
> 5.3%
> 2.2%
> 2.3%
> 3.3%
> 3.4%
> 3.5%
> 3.6%
> Categories
> Other — 26.7%
> Product Information Management — 10.5%
> Shipping & Delivery Management — 9.5%
> Promotion & Discount Administration — 9.0%
> Sales Analytics & Reporting — 8.9%
> Price Management & Analysis — 6.2%
> Inventory Tracking & Forecasting — 5.6%
> Customer Communication Generation — 5.3%
> Order Processing & Verification — 3.6%
> Product Comparison & Analysis — 3.5%
> Collection & Batch Operations — 3.4%
> Returns & Refund Processing — 3.3%
> Cost Calculation & Budgeting — 2.3%
> Customer Review Management — 2.2%

Figure 3: SLATE Tool Library category distribution. 

3.3 Hierarchical Execution Plans with Tool Invocations 

Given a complex natural language query q ∈ Q ,we construct a hierarchical execution plan p ∈ P in conjunction with a coherent toolkit T , where each substep of the plan is grounded through suitable tool interactions. Our design follows a top-down reasoning paradigm inspired by human problem-solving: the query is recursively decomposed into high-level goals, each of which is further refined into executable substeps. This decomposition en-ables interpretable multi-stage resolution and sys-tematic tool grounding aligned with task semantics. The construction pipeline consists of two key components: (1) Hierarchical Plan Generation, where each query is formulated as an ordered sequence of high-level goals and corresponding substeps; and (2) Tool Definition and Grounding, where tools are identified, created, or reused to sup-port the execution of substeps in a coherent and reusable manner. 

Hierarchical Plan Generation. Given a query 

q, we use Claude 3.7 to generate a multi-step plan [( hs 1, ss 1,1), (hs 1, ss 1,2), . . . , (hs k, ss k,l )] ,where hs i denotes a high-level objective, and ss i,j 

represents a substep that may or may not invoke a tool. Some substeps are purely summarization or decision steps without explicit tool usage. Notably, plan generation is independent of any toolset to ensure that the resulting structure is free from any tool-specific bias, solely reflects the natural decomposition of the query. 

Tool Definition and Grounding. For each sub-step requiring tool support, we define a tool in a normalized schema specifying its name, input ar-guments, functionality, and output format. Several principles guide the tool creation process. First, tool definitions must be specific and not trivially match substep descriptions; overly generic tools or name overlaps with substep text diminish the chal-lenge of tool selection. Second, execution plans often exhibit strong sequential dependencies: the inputs to tools in later steps may rely on the out-puts of earlier executions. We explicitly encode such dependencies by ensuring tool arguments are derivable from prior outputs or the original query context. Third, to promote tool reusability and avoid redundancy across queries, we introduce a tool deduplication strategy. Specifically, we embed all generated tool names and descriptions using the ModernBERT (Warner et al., 2025), and for each new query, we embed the query itself and retrieve the top-50 most semantically related tools from the existing library. The LLM is then encouraged to reuse existing tools where appropriate; otherwise, it generates new tools when novel functionality is required. After initial generation, we apply a tool normalization step to ensure consistency across similar tools. Tools are first grouped into func-tional categories, and within each category, the LLM merges tools with semantically equivalent functionality, reconciling input/output arguments to ensure compatibility. The execution plans are then updated to reflect any merged tool definitions, resulting in a coherent and unified plan-tool struc-ture across the dataset. 

3.4 Tool Simulator 

Implementing every tool in a massive library is often infeasible. However, tool execution feedback is essential for end-to-end evaluation and providing a closed-loop signal for agentic planning. Since end-users are primarily concerned with final task resolution rather than the specific trajectory of tool calls, we prioritize an evaluation metric centered on execution success. To facilitate this at scale, we develop a Tool Execution Simulator. 5The simulator’s core function is to provide con-textually appropriate outputs while differentiating between correct and incorrect invocations. If a tool call aligns with the ground-truth resolution, the sim-ulator returns a context-coherent result; otherwise, it provides an uninformative response to signal a failed step. Our simulator, along with all other 

SLATE components, is generated using Claude 3.7 and consists of two primary modules: 

(1) Context-Aware Simulation Database. This module serves as a repository of ground-truth exe-cution traces. During dataset generation, each exe-cution plan is annotated with the correct sequence of tool calls and their argument dependencies (e.g., 

ToolA(arg1=OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_1) ). Claude 3.7 generates a coherent trace of simulated outputs for each plan, ensuring consistency by condition-ing on the query, the full execution plan, and his-torical input-output pairs. These outcomes are stored in a lookup table structured as (tool_name, arguments) → outcome . For each tool, we also define a default, context-agnostic response for mis-matched invocations. 

(2) Semantic Equivalence Matching. To han-dle diverse runtime inputs, the simulator employs a semantic equivalence module to determine if an agent’s tool call matches a ground-truth entry. This approach moves beyond simple string comparison, accounting for variations in format (e.g., “YYYY-MM-DD” vs. “MM/DD/YYYY”) and semantic phrasing. If a match is successful, the simulator re-trieves the corresponding context-aware outcome; otherwise, it returns the default failure signal. This architecture enables dynamic, realistic simulation for robust end-to-end evaluation. We remark that SLATE and its simulation frame-work may be of independent interest to the com-munity for research on long-horizon planning and the development of more resilient tool-augmented agents. 

4 Preliminaries: Plan-Guided Tool Use 

This section formally defines the task of Plan-Guided Tool Utilization and reviews the core rea-soning and agentic paradigms. 

4.1 Problem Formulation 

We formulate the plan-guided tool utilization task as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Bellman and Dreyfus, 2015). Given a case query q ∈ Q ,its corresponding plan p, and a tool library T , an algorithm A must sequentially process each sub-step ss i,j defined in p. At each substep ss i,j ,the algorithm’s policy π selects an action ai,j ,which consists of choosing a tool ti,j ∈ T ∪{NO_OP } and generating its corresponding ar-guments. The policy, π(ai,j |Hi,j ), conditions on the execution history Hi,j , defined as the se-quence of outcomes from all preceding substeps: 

Hi,j = ⟨(hs r, ss r,s , a r,s , o r,s )⟩(r,s )≺(i,j ), where 

(r, s ) ≺ (i, j ) denotes all index pairs preceding substep (i, j ) in the plan’s execution order. Each observation or,s is the result returned by a tool sim-ulator S upon executing action ar,s . Note that pure reasoning-based approaches commit to a sequence of actions without leveraging intermediate observa-tions from the simulator. 

4.2 Reasoning and Acting Strategies 

Under the MDP framework defined above, agent strategies A can be broadly categorized into two paradigms. Reasoning-based approaches synthe-size a complete action sequence {ai,j } from a sin-gle, self-contained prompt and execute it open-loop, without leveraging intermediate observations 

{oi,j } from the simulator. In contrast, acting-based 

approaches interleave reasoning with interaction, so that decisions are updated online using execution feedback {oi,j }.Reasoning-based approaches therefore decouple planning from execution: actions are fixed before interaction, which simplifies rollout but limits in-trajectory correction. Acting-based approaches treat task resolution as interactive, where the policy π(ai,j | Hi,j ) is continuously informed by feedback {oi,j }. The foundational method, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), establishes an iterative cycle of Thought-Action-Observation , using feedback from the simulator 

S to inform the next step. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) enhances this with a self-correction mech-anism, where case-level failures trigger reflec-tion to generate guiding principles for subsequent attempts. More sophisticated strategies employ lookahead search over the state-action space. For instance, MCTS-based methods like LATS (Zhou et al., 2023) build a search tree using simulator-driven rollouts, enabling the agent to evaluate longer-term action consequences before commit-ment. 

5 EGB for Long-Horizon Planning 

We propose Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB) (il-lustrated in Fig. 4), an uncertainty-aware acting 6ReAct   

> Action Node
> Failure
> Reflexion
> Action Node
> Failure
> Reflect
> Start
> Success
> MCTS -based
> Iteration 2 Iteration 1
> Failure
> Failure Success
> EGB (Ours)
> Start Start
> Entropy 0.1
> Entropy 0.8 (High)
> Entropy 0.6 (2 nd High)
> Entropy 0.2
> Failure
> Iteration 1
> Iteration 2
> Failure
> Iteration 3
> Success

Figure 4: Comparison of different paradigms. 

strategy designed to navigate expansive tool spaces through iterative trajectory refinement in black-box settings. Unlike pure reasoning-based approaches, EGB operates within a MDP framework, where the agent’s policy π(ai,j |Hi,j ) is continuously in-formed by environmental feedback oi,j from a tool simulator S.

5.1 Initial Exploration and Uncertainty Quantification 

In the first iteration, EGB performs a sequential exe-cution of the plan p inspired by the ReAct paradigm while evaluating the uncertainty of every substep. For each substep ss i,j ∈ p, we assume a black-box setting where internal model logits are inaccessi-ble. To quantify decision uncertainty, we generate 

m candidate actions {a(1)  

> i,j

, a (2)  

> i,j

, . . . , a (m) 

> i,j

} through independent samplings from the policy: 

a(1 ...m ) 

> i,j

∼ π(ai,j |Hi,j ) (1) The agent executes the final action ai,j deter-mined by a majority vote among these m candi-dates and receives the observation oi,j = S(ai,j ).Simultaneously, we calculate the predictive entropy 

Ei,j based on the distribution of the m samples to serve as a proxy for uncertainty. Importantly, this estimation method relies solely on output diversity and does not require access to internal model logits or hidden states. While EGB can utilize internal signals if available, as demonstrated in our experi-ments, this sampling-based approach ensures that our strategy remains fully compatible with black-box proprietary models. The initial execution con-tinues until the agent either reaches a terminal state or the plan fails to achieve the goal. 

5.2 Ranked Branching and Iterative Search 

If the initial trajectory results in failure, EGB lever-ages the recorded entropy signals to optimize the exploration-exploitation trade-off. We rank all sub-steps ss i,j of the failed trace in descending order of their entropy values {Ei,j }. This ranking identifies decision points where the model was least confi-dent (highest entropy), suggesting that the optimal tool might be a plausible alternative rather than the top-voted choice. In subsequent iterations, EGB initiates branching from the step with the highest remaining uncertainty. Specifically, it selects a previously unexecuted candidate action from the original sampling set {a(1 ...m ) 

> i,j

} to spawn a new tra-jectory. The agent then resumes execution from this new state by following the plan-conditioned history until a successful terminal state is identified or the branching budget is exhausted. In essence, unlike MCTS-based methods that construct full search trees, EGB performs sequen-tial replays with selective branching triggered at high-uncertainty decision points along failed trajec-tories. This design offers key advantages in tool-rich environments: while MCTS branches based on exploration-exploitation scores that become noisy in long-horizon tasks, EGB uses entropy as a lo-calized diagnostic signal. Moreover, MCTS typ-ically branches during rollouts before observing outcomes, whereas EGB explicitly leverages failed trajectory information to pinpoint and rectify the specific decisions responsible for failure, avoid-ing prohibitive exhaustive searches in large action spaces. 

6 Experiments 

We set up experiments on the SLATE synthetic dataset to evaluate EGB against representative base-lines, and conduct studies on the impact of hyper-parameter and computational costs. 

Table 3: Evaluation of search methods on the SLATE 

synthetic dataset with Claude-Sonnet-4.                                           

> Method Plan-level Step-wise
> Execution Success Rate Tool Match Rate Action Identification Accuracy
> Baseline-LLM \65.2 ±0.8 \
> ReAct 29.3 ±1.2 66.4 ±0.4 85.7 ±0.1
> Reflexion 44.7 ±2.3 61.5 ±1.6 83.4 ±0.5
> LATS 36.5 ±2.5 63.4 ±1.3 87.3 ±0.5
> EGB-Sampling (Ours) 54.0 ±2.0 68.5 ±1.5 87.9 ±0.2

6.1 Experimental Settings Baselines: We evaluate EGB against both reasoning-based and acting-based methods. For the former, we consider Baseline-LLM , which se-lects tools without access to execution history or trajectory-level reasoning and is therefore excluded from plan-level evaluation. For acting-based meth-ods, we compare against: ReAct , which interleaves reasoning traces with tool execution in a sequen-tial manner; Reflexion , which incorporates self-7Table 4: Evaluation of search methods on the SLATE 

synthetic dataset with Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct.                                           

> Method Plan-level Step-wise
> Execution Success Rate Tool Match Rate Action Identification Accuracy
> Baseline-LLM \23.2 ±0.7 \
> ReAct 29.3 ±1.2 30.0 ±0.5 78.2 ±0.4
> Reflexion 44.2 ±2.1 25.2 ±0.7 82.9 ±2.9
> EGB-Sampling (Ours) 51.3 ±6.0 33.6 ±2.4 83.0 ±0.6
> EGB-Logits (Ours) 67.8 ±4.5 36.4 ±0.8 85.1 ±0.4

reflection by analyzing execution feedback to re-fine subsequent actions; and LATS , which builds an entire search tree with environment-aware roll-outs. 

Model: We conduct primary experiments on Claude-4-Sonnet, a proprietary black-box model with inaccessible logits, to demonstrate that EGB is applicable in real-world deployment settings. To validate generalizability, we additionally evaluate on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Qwen et al., 2025), an open-source model with accessible logits. We se-lected Qwen2.5-7B based on preliminary experi-ments indicating competitive instruction-following performance and stable entropy-uncertainty cor-relation among models of comparable size. For cross-benchmark validation, we also use GPT-OSS-120b (OpenAI et al., 2025), an open-weight rea-soning model with an efficient mixture-of-experts transformer architecture. We use AWS Bedrock to access Claude and GPT models, and 5 NVIDIA L4 GPUs for Qwen experiments. 

Evaluation Metrics: We assess performance from two complementary perspectives: plan-level 

and step-wise evaluation. • Step-wise evaluation analyzes decision-making at each individual step through two metrics: Ac-tion Identification Accuracy measures the propor-tion of steps where the agent correctly determines whether a tool call is needed. Tool Match Rate evaluates, among steps requiring tools, the align-ment rate between the agent’s tool selection and the reference tool in the plan. • Plan-level evaluation assesses the correctness of the final execution result. We report Execution Success Rate, defined as the proportion of cases where the final execution results exactly match the annotated reference resolutions in the plan, regardless of intermediate missteps that do not affect the outcome. For methods with plan-level retries (Reflexion, EGB, and LATS), this is equiv-alent to pass@k as introduced in τ -bench (Yao et al., 2024b), i.e., the probability of reaching a success before exhausting k trials. For EGB, we denote this budget by b.

Configurable Hyperparameters: EGB intro-duces two critical hyperparameters: m, the number of samplings used to estimate the predictive entropy of tool selection at each step, and b, the branching budget that limits the number of iterations for re-planning and exploration. Unless otherwise spec-ified, we set m = 10 and b = 5 in experiments. For all experiments, we set LLM inference hyper-parameters temperature = 1. These settings ensure consistent and comparable results across all base-line methods and model configurations. 

6.2 Experimental Results Results on a Proprietary Model: We first conduct comprehensive experiments on Claude-4-Sonnet to evaluate EGB against baseline methods, with results presented in Table 3. At the plan level, EGB achieves substantial improvements in execu-tion success rate, outperforming ReAct by 24.7% and Reflexion by 9.3%. Notably, EGB also sur-passes LATS by 17.5% despite LATS being con-strained to 25 global search node visits per case— an empirical limit chosen to match EGB’s average computational budget. This significant plan-level advantage, coupled with only marginal improve-ments in step-wise metrics (2.0%–7.0% on Tool Match Rate), reveals a critical limitation of base-line methods: without access to step-level correct-ness feedback from the simulator, they struggle to identify error-prone decisions under constrained computation. Unlike EGB, which leverages inter-nal policy uncertainty (entropy) to pinpoint likely failure points, baseline methods rely solely on end-of-trajectory feedback. In long-horizon tasks, this leaves them unable to effectively localize which steps in the Markov decision process are responsi-ble for failure. This effect is particularly evident for Reflexion and LATS, which exhibit decreased Tool Match Rates compared to Baseline-LLM and Re-Act, suggesting they modify previously correct tool selections into incorrect ones during their search process. Their plan-level improvements thus stem primarily from exploring more execution paths rather than intelligently targeting problematic deci-sions, resulting in occasional successes by chance rather than systematic error correction. 

Results on an Open-source Model: To further validate our approach, we conduct experiments on 8Table 5: Comparison of computational cost per case across different search methods on SLATE synthetic dataset.                                                                      

> Claude-Sonnet-4 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Method Running Time (seconds) Running Time ∗
> (seconds) Input Tokens Output Tokens LLM Invokes Baseline-LLM 77 138 1.83 ×10 53.8×10 332.0
> ReAct 195 150 1.95 ×10 54.0×10 332.0
> Reflexion 766 707 8.90 ×10 52.41 ×10 4122.2
> LATS 620 \\\\
> EGB-Logits (Ours) \254 (1 .61 + 4 .86) ×10 5†6.4×10 344.6 + 149.6 †
> EGB-Sampling (Ours) 718 1,029 2.19 ×10 63.17 ×10 4176.4
> †For EGB-Logits, input token usage consists of 1.61 ×10 5from generation queries and 4.86 ×10 5from logits-only forward passes (no output tokens). LLM invokes includes 44.6 generation calls and 149.6 lightweight forward passes. ∗Parallelization across all methods are disabled for Qwen experiments.

Table 6: Entropy-error relationship on SLATE using EGB-Logits.                        

> Entropy Range #Steps #Errors Error Rate
> [0 .000 ,0.640) 365 184 50.7%
> [0 .640 ,1.281) 116 79 68.1%
> [1 .281 ,1.921) 67 52 77.6%
> [1 .921 ,2.561) 21 20 95.2%
> [2 .561 ,3.202] 15 14 93.3%

Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, a white-box model that en-ables direct computation of entropy from output logits rather than sampling-based estimation. As shown in Table 4, the findings mirror those ob-served with Claude-Sonnet-4: EGB substantially outperforms baseline methods at the plan level while achieving marginally better step-wise perfor-mance. We omit LATS from this evaluation due to the prohibitive computational cost of hosting open-source models for extensive tree search. Notably, EGB-Logits achieves 67.8% execution success rate, surpassing EGB-Sampling by 16.5%. This obser-vation reinforces our core assumption that entropy serves as a reliable indicator of error-prone deci-sions. Besides, accurate entropy computation from logits proves more effective than sampling-based estimation. 

Error Rate and Entropy Correlation on 

SLATE : To assess whether entropy provides a use-ful branching signal, we analyze EGB-Logits at the step level, where error is defined as a first-pass tool mismatch against the reference trajectory. As shown in Table 6, correct steps have lower entropy than error steps (mean = 0 .052 vs. 0.119 ), and er-ror rate rises from 50.7% to 93.3% across entropy bins (with a small fluctuation in the highest-entropy bins). These results indicate that entropy is an ef-fective relative prioritization signal for branch se-lection rather than a strict binary error detector. In successful branch corrections, errors are reduced through direct tool fixes, cascade fixes via corrected 

Figure 5: Cross-benchmark validation on adapted Ultra-Tool with GPT-OSS-120b. 

execution context, and functionally equivalent al-ternative tools; detailed breakdowns are provided in Appendix Sec. B.2. 

Cross-Benchmark Validation on Adapted Ul-traTool: Because SLATE is synthesized with Claude-family models, we additionally evaluate on adapted UltraTool to reduce potential model-family bias and test whether our conclusions trans-fer beyond SLATE . We choose UltraTool because its plans are shorter-horizon, enabling practical com-parison against higher-budget tree-search baselines that are too expensive on SLATE . In Figure 5 (de-tails in Appendix Sec. B.3), Self-Consistency sam-ples multiple ( m = 10 ) tool choices per step and executes the majority-voted action, while LATS-

k denotes LATS with an upper limit of [10 , 50] 

distinct search-tree nodes visited. EGB remains consistently strong: EGB-Logits matches the best reported success rate (LATS-50) while using only a fraction of the token cost, and EGB-Sampling also achieves high performance comparable to LATS-30; meanwhile, LATS shows the expected budget– accuracy trade-off, with success improving as node budget increases but with diminishing returns. 

Computation Cost: Table 5 presents the com-91 3 5 10 20      

> m (Number of Samplings)
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> Plan-level Execution Success Rate (%)
> m=1 is ReAct method b=5
> 135810
> b (Number of Branches)
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> Plan-level Execution Success Rate (%)
> m=10

Figure 6: Evaluation of EGB search with Claude-Sonnet-4 on the SLATE synthetic dataset with varied configurations: (a) number of samplings, m, used to estimate entropy, and (b) budget, b, as the maximum number of branch trials. 

putational cost comparison. For Qwen experi-ments, we disable parallelization across all meth-ods to ensure fair comparison on a single GPU, resulting in EGB-Sampling being slower than Re-flexion (1,029s vs. 707s). However, the m

independent samples in EGB-Sampling can be trivially parallelized—as demonstrated in Claude experiments with 2 concurrent workers, where EGB-Sampling achieves 718 seconds ( 6.3% faster than Reflexion). Compared with LATS (620s on Claude), EGB-Sampling incurs moderate extra run-time but delivers substantially higher execution success in Table 3. EGB-Logits demonstrates the strongest efficiency, requiring only 254 sec-onds ( 2.8 × faster than Reflexion) by leveraging lightweight forward passes without autoregressive generation. Notably, EGB-Logits reduces output tokens by 73% compared to Reflexion ( 6.4 × 10 3

vs. 2.41 × 10 4). These results confirm that entropy-guided branching achieves strong performance without prohibitive computational overhead. 

Impact of Hyperparameters: We systemati-cally investigate EGB’s two critical hyperparam-eters, as illustrated in Figure 4. The number of samplings m controls entropy estimation quality: performance increases from 29% at m = 1 to 60% at m = 20 . Similarly, the branching budget b gov-erns the extent of error correction: success rate improves from 32% at b = 1 to 60% at b = 10 .Both parameters exhibit diminishing returns be-yond certain thresholds; thus, we adopt m = 10 

and b = 5 as our default configuration to balance performance gains against computational cost. No-tably, when m = 1 , EGB degenerates to the Re-Act method without leveraging uncertainty signals. When b = 1 , no error-correction branches are trig-gered, so performance is determined solely by the initial trajectory quality. The key takeaway is that performance improves with both more accurate entropy estimation and increased branching oppor-tunities for error correction. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced SLATE , a large scale benchmark for assessing tool augmented agents in long horizon e-commerce tasks. Our evaluation re-vealed that current methods struggle with efficiency and self-correction in vast action spaces. To ad-dress this, we proposed Entropy Guided Branching, an uncertainty aware search algorithm that dynami-cally allocates exploration effort where predictive entropy is high. Experimental results demonstrate that EGB significantly improves task success rates and computational efficiency. Together, SLATE and EGB provide a robust foundation for building reli-able LLM agents for complex environments. Addi-tional details are provided in Appendix. 

8 Limitations 

Despite the robust performance of EGB and the comprehensive nature of SLATE , several limitations warrant further investigation. 

Limitations of SLATE . While SLATE incorpo-rates intricate sequential dependencies and context-aware responses, it remains a synthetic benchmark. Its simulator is designed to return deterministic out-comes for matched tool invocations to enable con-trolled plan-level evaluation, which does not fully capture operational behaviors of real APIs such as latency spikes, retry policies, transient invocation failures, and external service instability. In addi-tion, SLATE currently evaluates tool-invocation de-cisions under a fixed reference plan, so it does not directly assess an agent’s ability to synthesize high-quality plans from scratch. Finally, since both the benchmark and simulator were generated through a closed-source LLM pipeline (Claude 3.7), the dataset may contain model-specific biases. This can make cross-backbone comparisons less strictly fair; therefore, our main conclusions emphasize comparisons across tool-use paradigms under the same backbone LLM. 

Limitations of EGB. Although EGB-Sampling is fully compatible with black-box models, its re-liance on multiple independent samplings ( m =10 ) to estimate entropy introduces higher infer-ence latency and API costs compared to single-pass greedy methods, potentially limiting its application in real-time or resource-constrained scenarios. De-terministic replay in our experiments is a property of the SLATE simulator and a practical implemen-tation of backtracking, rather than a fundamental 10 constraint of EGB. This assumption is also shared by tree-search baselines such as LATS, and prac-tical systems can often support limited backtrack-ing through checkpointing, idempotent API design, and rollback mechanisms; extending EGB to fully non-deterministic stateful environments remains future work. Moreover, this study focuses on e-commerce tasks; further work is needed to vali-date the generalizability of entropy-guided search in other tool-rich environments, such as software engineering or scientific research. 

9 Ethical Considerations 

This work focuses on improving the evaluation and planning efficiency of tool-augmented LLM agents through a synthetic benchmark and an uncertainty-aware search strategy. The proposed dataset does not contain real user data, personal information, or proprietary APIs, thereby minimizing privacy and data misuse risks. However, more efficient planning and execution may lower the barrier to de-ploying highly autonomous agents, which could be misused if applied without appropriate safeguards. In particular, aggressive exploration strategies may be undesirable in safety-critical or high-stakes en-vironments. We emphasize that our methods are intended for controlled research settings and should be combined with external safety mechanisms, ac-cess controls, and human oversight in real-world deployment. Additionally, as the benchmark is syn-thetically generated, it may inherit biases from the underlying language model, and results should be interpreted with appropriate caution. 

References 

Michael Ahn, Debidatta Dwibedi, Chelsea Finn, Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrish-nan, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, and 1 others. 2024. Au-tort: Embodied foundation models for large scale orchestration of robotic agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12963 .Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ 2-bench: Evaluat-ing conversational agents in a dual-control environ-ment. Preprint , arXiv:2506.07982. Richard E Bellman and Stuart E Dreyfus. 2015. Applied dynamic programming . Princeton university press. Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. 2023. Emergent autonomous scientific research ca-pabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332 .Chen Chen, Xinlong Hao, Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Yuefeng Huang, Wulong Liu, Xinzhi Wang, Defu Lian, Baoqun Yin, Yasheng Wang, and Wu Liu. 2025. Acebench: Who wins the match point in tool usage? Preprint , arXiv:2501.12851. Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xi-angliang Zhang. 2024. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 .Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992 .Pengfei He, Zhenwei Dai, Bing He, Hui Liu, Xianfeng Tang, Hanqing Lu, Juanhui Li, Jiayuan Ding, Sub-habrata Mukherjee, Suhang Wang, Yue Xing, Jiliang Tang, and Benoit Dumoulin. 2025. Traject-bench:a trajectory-aware benchmark for evaluating agentic tool use. Preprint , arXiv:2510.04550. Nathan Herr, Tim Rocktäschel, and Roberta Raileanu. 2025. Llm-first search: Self-guided exploration of the solution space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05213 .Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, and 1 others. 2023. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352 , 3(4):6. Shijue Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Jianqiao Lu, Qi Zhu, Jiahui Gao, Weiwen Liu, Yutai Hou, Xingshan Zeng, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, and 1 others. 2024. Planning, creation, usage: Benchmarking llms for comprehensive tool utilization in real-world complex scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17167 .Yue Huang, Jiawen Shi, Yuan Li, Chenrui Fan, Siyuan Wu, Qihui Zhang, Yixin Liu, Pan Zhou, Yao Wan, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, and 1 others. 2023. Meta-tool benchmark for large language models: Deciding whether to use tools and which to use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03128 .Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Rus-lan Salakhutdinov. 2024. Tree search for language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01476 .Junlong Li, Wenshuo Zhao, Jian Zhao, Weihao Zeng, Haoze Wu, Xiaochen Wang, Rui Ge, Yuxuan Cao, Yuzhen Huang, Wei Liu, Junteng Liu, Zhaochen Su, Yiyang Guo, Fan Zhou, Lueyang Zhang, Juan Miche-lini, Xingyao Wang, Xiang Yue, Shuyan Zhou, and 2 others. 2026a. The tool decathlon: Benchmark-ing language agents for diverse, realistic, and long-horizon task execution. Preprint , arXiv:2510.25726. Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023a. Api-bank: A comprehensive 

11 benchmark for tool-augmented llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08244 .Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023b. Api-bank: A comprehen-sive benchmark for tool-augmented llms. Preprint ,arXiv:2304.08244. Xianzhi Li, Ethan Callanan, Abdellah Ghassel, and Xiaodan Zhu. 2026b. Entropy-gated branch-ing for efficient test-time reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.21961. Jiarui Lu, Thomas Holleis, Yizhe Zhang, Bernhard Au-mayer, Feng Nan, Felix Bai, Shuang Ma, Shen Ma, Mengyu Li, Guoli Yin, Zirui Wang, and Ruoming Pang. 2025. Toolsandbox: A stateful, conversational, interactive evaluation benchmark for llm tool use capabilities. Preprint , arXiv:2408.04682. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46534–46594. Rithesh Murthy, Shelby Heinecke, Juan Carlos Niebles, Zhiwei Liu, Le Xue, Weiran Yao, Yihao Feng, Zeyuan Chen, Akash Gokul, Devansh Arpit, and 1 others. 2023. Rex: Rapid exploration and exploita-tion for ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08962 .OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, and 108 others. 2025. gpt-oss-120b and gpt-oss-20b model card. Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2024. Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive apis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:126544–126565. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, and 1 others. 2023. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 .Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. Tool learning with large language mod-els: A survey. Frontiers of Computer Science ,19(8):198343. Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, and 25 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ash-win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with ver-bal reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2303.11366 , 1. Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. 2020. Alfworld: Aligning text and em-bodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768 .Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, Boxi Cao, and Le Sun. 2023. Toolalpaca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05301 .Jun Wang, Jiamu Zhou, Muning Wen, Xiaoyun Mo, Haoyu Zhang, Qiqiang Lin, Cheng Jin, Xihuai Wang, Weinan Zhang, Qiuying Peng, and Jun Wang. 2025. Hammerbench: Fine-grained function-calling eval-uation in real mobile device scenarios. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.16516. Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, and 1 others. 2024. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. 

Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 .Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié, Orion Weller, Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, and 1 others. 2025. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2526–2547. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yi-wen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, and 1 others. 2025. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. Science China Information Sci-ences , 68(2):121101. Weikai Xu, Chengrui Huang, Shen Gao, and Shuo Shang. 2025. Llm-based agents for tool learning: A survey: W. xu et al. Data Science and Engineer-ing , pages 1–31. 

12 Hongyang Yang, Boyu Zhang, Neng Wang, Cheng Guo, Xiaoli Zhang, Likun Lin, Junlin Wang, Tianyu Zhou, Mao Guan, Runjia Zhang, and 1 others. 2024. Fin-robot: An open-source ai agent platform for finan-cial applications using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14767 .Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2022. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:20744–20757. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024a. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 .Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024b. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. 

Preprint , arXiv:2406.12045. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023a. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Guanghao Ye, Khiem Duc Pham, Xinzhi Zhang, Sivakanth Gopi, Baolin Peng, Beibin Li, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Huseyin A Inan. 2025. On the emer-gence of thinking in llms i: Searching for the right intuition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06773 .Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2023. Lan-guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04406 .

13 Appendices 

A Examples 

This section presents a representative example from the SLATE dataset, illustrating the transformation from a user query to a hierarchical execution plan, associated tool calls, and deterministic simulation outputs. The example demonstrates the plan structure and execution semantics used for step-wise and plan-level evaluation. 

Case 

I want to create a limited-time summer promotion for my “ThermoFlex Water Bottle” (SKU: 

TF-WB-2023 ) that offers 15% off when customers buy 2 or more units . The promotion should run from June 1, 2024 to August 31, 2024 , with a minimum purchase requirement of $35.00 . How do I set this up and create a promo code “SUMMERTF24” that customers can use at checkout? 

Plan 

• step : 1. Verify product information 

– step : 1.1 Retrieve product details 

– action : get_product_details (sku =“TF-WB-2023” )• step : 2. Create the promotion 

– step : 2.1 Set up promotion parameters 

– action : create_promotion ( product_id =OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_1.1.product_id , dis-count_percentage =15, min_quantity =2, min_purchase =35.00, start_date =“2024-06-01” ,

end_date =“2024-08-31” )• step : 3. Configure promo code 

– step : 3.1 Create promo code 

– action : create_promo_code ( promotion_id =OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_2.1.promotion_id ,

code =“SUMMERTF24” )• step : “4. Verify and activate the promotion” 

– step : “4.1 Validate promotion setup” 

– action : validate_promotion ( promotion_id =OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_2.1.promotion_id )

– step : “4.2 Activate the promotion” 

– action : activate_promotion ( promotion_id =OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_2.1.promotion_id ,

promo_code_id =OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_3.1.promo_code_id )

> Figure 7: Example of plan generation and tool execution.

14 Simulate Outputs with context 

• get_product_details (sku =“TF-WB-2023” )

⇒ Output: product_id =“P-TF-WB-2023-001” 

• create_promotion ( product_id =“P-TF-WB-2023-001” , discount_percentage =15, 

min_quantity =2, min_purchase =35.00, start_date =“2024-06-01” , end_date =“2024-08-31” )

⇒ Output: promotion_id =“PROMO-TF-2024-S001” 

• create_promo_code ( promotion_id =“PROMO-TF-2024-S001” , code =“SUMMERTF24” )

⇒ Output: promo_code_id =“PC-SUMMERTF24-001” 

• validate_promotion (promotion_id =“PROMO-TF-2024-S001” )• activate_promotion ( promotion_id =“PROMO-TF-2024-S001” ,

promo_code_id =“PC-SUMMERTF24-001” )

⇒ Output: success =“true” 

Deterministic Simulation Dictionary 

1. get_product_details (Args: sku) 

TF-WB-2023 ⇒ P-TF-WB-2023-001 

Other value ⇒ different default value 

2. create_promotion (Args: product_id, discount_percentage, min_quantity, min_purchase, start_date, end_date) 

P-TF-WB-2023-001, 15, 2, 35, 2024-06-01, 2024-08-31 ⇒ PROMO-TF-2024-S001 

Other value ⇒ different default value 

3. create_promo_code (Args: promotion_id, code) 

PROMO-TF-2024-S001, SUMMERTF24 ⇒ PC-SUMMERTF24-001 

Other value ⇒ different default value 

> Figure 8: Deterministic simulation dictionary for tool calls.

15 B Supplementary Experiments 

B.1 Leveraging Past Executions with Memory                                                          

> Table 7: Evaluation of search methods with vs. without memory on the SLATE synthetic dataset with Claude-4-Sonnet.
> Method Plan-level Step-wise Evaluation
> Execution Success Rate Tool Match Rate Action Identification Accuracy
> ReAct 29.3 ±1.2 66.4 ±0.4 85.7 ±0.1
> Reflexion 44.7 ±2.3 61.5 ±1.6 83.4 ±0.5
> EGB-Sampling (Ours) 54.0 ±2.0 68.5 ±1.5 87.9 ±0.2
> ReAct-with-Memory 86.3 ±0.6 92.7 ±0.3 98.7 ±0.1
> Reflexion-with-Memory 91.0 ±1.5 92.7 ±1.1 98.4 ±0.3
> EGB-with-memory (Ours) 92.7 ±1.0 92.6 ±0.5 98.7 ±0.2

Experiment Setup. While EGB demonstrates strong performance through entropy-guided exploration, we investigate whether incorporating memory from previous task executions can further enhance its capabilities. We create a pseudo in-distribution setting by randomly partitioning the dataset D into a validation set Dval (50 samples) and a test set Dtest (50 samples), where both sets are drawn from the same task distribution but contain no shared tasks. We accumulate execution traces from the validation set as memory and evaluate on the test set. 

Analysis. As shown in Table 7, memory substantially improves performance across all methods: ReAct improves from 29.3% to 86.3% (+57.0%), Reflexion from 44.7% to 91.0% (+46.3%), and EGB from 54.0% to 92.7% (+38.7%). Notably, even with memory enabled, EGB maintains its advantage over baselines, outperforming ReAct-with-Memory by 6.4% and Reflexion-with-Memory by 1.7%. These results demonstrate that while memory provides a powerful mechanism for leveraging past experiences in similar tasks, EGB continues to offer systematic improvements regardless of whether memory is available, confirming its effectiveness as a complementary approach to memory-based methods. 

B.2 Error Entropy Correlation 

> Table 8: Entropy-error relationship on SLATE using Qwen-logits.

Entropy Range #Steps #Errors Error Rate 

[0 .000 , 0.640) 365 184 50.7% 

[0 .640 , 1.281) 116 79 68.1% 

[1 .281 , 1.921) 67 52 77.6% 

[1 .921 , 2.561) 21 20 95.2% 

[2 .561 , 3.202) 15 14 93.3% 

Experiment Setup. We use the Qwen-logits experiment results because they provide calibrated per-step logit distributions for entropy estimation. Entropy is computed at each tool-selection step, excluding fallback steps where logit computation fails. We compare steps whose first-pass selected tool matches the reference tool ( Correct , n = 233 ) against those that do not ( Error , n = 349 ), for a total of 582 analyzed steps. Error rate in Table 8 is defined as the fraction of steps in each entropy bin whose first-pass tool does not match the reference. 

Analysis. Correct steps have substantially lower entropy (mean = 0 .052 , median = 0 .000 ) than error steps (mean = 0 .119 , median = 0 .081 ), indicating stronger confidence when the tool choice is correct. Across bins, error rate rises from 50.7% in the lowest-entropy range to above 93% in the highest ranges, showing a near-monotonic trend. The lowest-entropy bin still has non-trivial error due to benchmark 16 difficulty: with 1000 tools and functionally similar candidates, the model can be confidently wrong. Overall, entropy is best interpreted as a relative prioritization signal for branching rather than a binary error detector. 

How Branching Reduces Error. We further analyze 68 successful branch corrections (68 out of 114 first-pass failed plans corrected by entropy-guided exploration). We identify three mechanisms: (1) Direct fix (17.6%), where the branched step switches to the reference tool; (2) Cascade fix (30.9%), where the branched step changes execution context and downstream tools become correct (on average, each branch changes 0.9 subsequent steps); and (3) Functional equivalence (51.5%), where the branched tool name differs from the reference but yields equivalent outputs. These mechanisms explain why entropy-guided branching remains effective even when exact tool-name matching is not the only path to success. 

B.3 Cross-Benchmark Validation on Adapted UltraTool 

> Table 9: Evaluation of different methods on adapted UltraTool with GPT-OSS-120b.

Methods Execution Success Rate Input Tokens Output Tokens 

DirectLLM 67.3 ± 4.7 2.65 × 10 4 7.17 × 10 2

ReAct 69.0 ± 2.0 2.87 × 10 4 8.68 × 10 2

Self-Consistency 69.3 ± 1.3 2.87 × 10 5 8.65 × 10 3

Reflexion 77.3 ± 3.7 1.56 × 10 5 4.85 × 10 3

EGB-Sampling 79.7 ± 0.7 1.69 × 10 5 5.36 × 10 3

EGB-Logits 82.0 ± 1.0 3.75 × 10 4 1.79 × 10 3

LATS-10 71.3 ± 4.3 1.39 × 10 5 4.95 × 10 3

LATS-20 74.0 ± 3.0 2.21 × 10 5 6.37 × 10 3

LATS-30 79.7 ± 1.3 2.96 × 10 5 8.41 × 10 3

LATS-40 80.3 ± 2.3 3.64 × 10 5 1.04 × 10 4

LATS-50 82.0 ± 2.0 4.30 × 10 5 1.22 × 10 4

Experiment Setup. To reduce potential model-family circularity from SLATE (synthesized with Claude-family models), we perform external validation on UltraTool with GPT-OSS-120b. UltraTool does not fully match our setting (limited long-horizon structure, limited grounded execution outputs, and 1000-query test size), so we adapt it by constructing an executable library of 436 tools and evaluate the first 100 test queries. We include two additional baselines in this setting: Self-Consistency (10 end-to-end ReAct samples with plan-level majority vote) and LATS with budgets 10/20/30/40/50. 

Analysis. Table 9 shows that EGB-Logits (82.0%) matches LATS-50 (82.0%) while using only a fraction of the token cost, and outperforms all other methods. EGB-Sampling (79.7%) also achieves high performance, matching LATS-30 (79.7%) with substantially fewer tokens. We also observe a clear budget–accuracy trade-off for LATS: success improves from 71.3% (LATS-10) to 82.0% (LATS-50), with diminishing returns as the search budget increases. These results support an accuracy–efficiency advantage for entropy-guided branching rather than universal dominance at all budgets. 

B.4 Robustness to Inaccurate Plan Specifications 

> Table 10: Execution success rate under accurate vs. inaccurate plans on adapted UltraTool with GPT-OSS-120b.

Methods Accurate Plan Inaccurate Plan 

ReAct 69.0 ± 2.0 65.0 ± 5.0 Self-Consistency 69.3 ± 1.3 65.3 ± 0.7 EGB-Sampling 79.7 ± 0.7 72.0 ± 2.0 

Experiment Setup. To test robustness to imprecise planning, we modify original UltraTool plans by rewriting some tool-call sub-steps into broader descriptions while preserving intent (e.g., “Use file writing 17 tool to create and write content” → “Perform file operation”, “Search for files matching pattern” → “Find relevant files”). In total, 10.5% of tool-call sub-steps are modified. 

Analysis. All methods degrade when plan specificity drops, but EGB-Sampling remains strongest (72.0%). Notably, EGB-Sampling under inaccurate plans still exceeds ReAct and Self-Consistency under accurate plans, indicating that entropy-guided branching provides robustness to upstream plan imprecision. 18 C Algorithms 

C.1 Pseudocode Algorithm 1 Entropy-Guided Branching (EGB) 

Require: Query q, Plan p = {ss 1,1, . . . , ss n,m n }, Tool library T , Simulator S, Global branch limit 

B = 50 , Per-step branch limit Bs = 5  

> 1:

// Phase 1: Initial Execution with Entropy Recording  

> 2:

H ← ⟨⟩ {Execution history}  

> 3:

E ← ⟨⟩ {Entropy tree}  

> 4:

for each substep ss i,j ∈ p do  

> 5:

Ci,j ← GET CANDIDATES (q, ss i,j , H, T ) {Retrieve candidate tools via embedding search}  

> 6:

(a∗ 

> i,j

, E i,j , Di,j ) ← COMPUTE ENTROPY (q, ss i,j , H, Ci,j ) {Alg. 2 or 3}  

> 7:

oi,j ← S (a∗ 

> i,j

) {Execute selected action}  

> 8:

H ← H ∪ ⟨ (ss i,j , a ∗ 

> i,j

, o i,j )⟩ 

> 9:

E ← E ∪ ⟨ (i, j, E i,j , Di,j )⟩ {Store entropy and distribution}  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

if TASK SUCCESS (H) then  

> 12:

return H 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

// Phase 2: Entropy-Guided Branching  

> 15:

Esorted ← SORT BYENTROPY (E, descending ) 

> 16:

b ← 0 {Global branch counter}  

> 17:

for each (i, j, E i,j , Di,j ) ∈ E sorted do  

> 18:

t∗ 

> i,j

← EXTRACT TOOL NAME (a∗ 

> i,j

) {Tool selected in first pass}  

> 19:

Talt ← { t : ( t, p t) ∈ D i,j , t ̸ = t∗ 

> i,j

} {Alternative tools from distribution}  

> 20:

Sort Talt by probability in descending order  

> 21:

bs ← 0 {Per-step branch counter}  

> 22:

for each t′ ∈ T alt do  

> 23:

if b ≥ B or bs ≥ Bs then  

> 24:

break {Budget exhausted}  

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

a′ 

> i,j

← GET ORGENERATE CALL (t′, q, ss i,j , H <(i,j ), Di,j ) {Use cached call or generate params †} 

> 27:

H′ ← H<(i,j ) ∪ ⟨ (ss i,j , a ′ 

> i,j

, S(a′ 

> i,j

)) ⟩ {Branch from step (i, j )} 

> 28:

for each subsequent substep ss r,s where (r, s ) ≻ (i, j ) do  

> 29:

ar,s ← SELECT TOOL (q, ss r,s , H ′, T ) {Single-pass selection}  

> 30:

H′ ← H′ ∪ ⟨ (ss r,s , a r,s , S(ar,s )) ⟩ 

> 31:

end for  

> 32:

if TASK SUCCESS (H′) then  

> 33:

return H′ 

> 34:

end if  

> 35:

b ← b + 1 ; bs ← bs + 1  

> 36:

end for  

> 37:

end for  

> 38:

return H {Return first-pass result}    

> †For Alg. 2, uses pre-sampled calls stored in Di,j . For Alg. 3, generates parameters on-demand via LLM.

19 Algorithm 2 Entropy Computation via Sampling (EGB-Sampling) 

Require: Query q, Substep ss i,j , History Hi,j , Candidates Ci,j , Sample count m

Ensure: Selected action a∗ 

> i,j

, Entropy Ei,j , Action distribution Di,j  

> 1:

votes ← {} {Vote counts per tool}  

> 2:

calls ← {} {Sampled tool calls per tool}  

> 3:

for k = 1 to m do  

> 4:

a(k) 

> i,j

∼ π(ai,j | Hi,j , Ci,j ) {Sample complete action (tool + params) from LLM}  

> 5:

t(k) ← EXTRACT TOOL NAME (a(k) 

> i,j

) 

> 6:

votes [t(k)] ← votes [t(k)] + 1  

> 7:

calls [t(k)] ← calls [t(k)] ∪ { a(k) 

> i,j

} {Store sampled call for potential branching}  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

// Compute entropy from vote distribution  

> 10:

for each tool t ∈ votes do  

> 11:

pt ← votes [t]/m  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Ei,j ← − P 

> t

pt log pt 

> 14:

// Select majority tool (use pre-sampled call)  

> 15:

t∗ ← arg max t votes [t] 

> 16:

a∗ 

> i,j

← SELECT ONE (calls [t∗]) {Use one of the sampled calls}  

> 17:

Di,j ← { (t, p t, calls [t]) : t ∈ votes } {Store distribution with pre-sampled calls}  

> 18:

return (a∗ 

> i,j

, E i,j , Di,j )

20 Algorithm 3 Entropy Computation via Logits (EGB-Logits): Qwen2.5 Adaptation 

Require: Query q, Substep ss i,j , History Hi,j , Candidates Ci,j = {c0, . . . , c K−1} with K ≤ 100 ,Threshold τ = 0 .01  

> 1:

prompt ← BUILD PROMPT (q, ss i,j , H i,j , Ci,j ) {Ask LLM to output tool index 0 to K−1} 

> 2:

x ← TOKENIZE (prompt ) 

> 3:

// Get first token distribution over digits 0-9  

> 4:

l(1) ← FORWARD PASS (x)[ −1] {Logits at last position}  

> 5:

p(1) ← SOFTMAX (l(1) [‘0’ :‘9’ ]) {Probability over digit tokens}  

> 6:

// Compute conditional second token distribution  

> 7:

P ← 0K {Probability for each candidate}  

> 8:

for d1 = 0 to 9 do  

> 9:

x′ ← CONCAT (x, TOKEN (d1))  

> 10:

l(2) ← FORWARD PASS (x′)[ −1]  

> 11:

p(2) ← SOFTMAX (l(2) [‘0’ :‘9’ ]) 

> 12:

pend ← 1 − P9 

> d2=0

p(2)  

> d2

{Probability of non-digit token (sequence end)}  

> 13:

if d1 < K then  

> 14:

P[d1] ← P[d1] + p(1)  

> d1

· pend {Single-digit index}  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

for d2 = 0 to 9 do  

> 17:

idx ← d1 × 10 + d2 

> 18:

if 10 ≤ idx < K then  

> 19:

P[idx ] ← P[idx ] + p(1)  

> d1

· p(2)  

> d2

{Two-digit index}  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

end for  

> 23:

P ← P/ P 

> k

P[k] {Normalize}  

> 24:

// Compute entropy over all candidates  

> 25:

Ei,j ← − PK−1 

> k=0

P[k] log P[k] 

> 26:

// Filter candidates by probability threshold for branching  

> 27:

Cfiltered  

> i,j

← { ck : P[k] ≥ τ } 

> 28:

// Select highest probability tool and generate parameters  

> 29:

k∗ ← arg max k P[k] 

> 30:

a∗ 

> i,j

← GENERATE PARAMS (ck∗ , q, ss i,j , H i,j ) {Generate params only for selected tool}  

> 31:

Di,j ← { (ck, P[k]) : ck ∈ C filtered  

> i,j

} {Params generated lazily during branching}  

> 32:

return (a∗ 

> i,j

, E i,j , Di,j )

21 C.2 Complexity Analysis 

Let n denote the number of plan substeps, m the number of entropy samples per step in EGB-Sampling, and b the number of executed branch attempts in Phase 2 (bounded by B). We summarize the dominant computational costs in terms of LLM-scale operations. 

Phase 1 (initial execution + entropy recording). For EGB-Sampling, each step performs entropy estimation with m sampled calls, yielding O(nm ) dominant LLM complexity. For EGB-Logits, entropy is derived from direct token-level probabilities (effectively m=1 ), reducing Phase 1 to O(n) dominant LLM complexity. 

Phase 2 (entropy-guided branching). Each branch reuses the prefix before the branch point and re-executes only the suffix with single-pass tool selection. In the worst case, each attempt may replay O(n) remaining steps, so Phase 2 is O(bn ); with branch points roughly centered, the average replay length is about n/ 2, i.e., O(bn ) up to constants. 

Total complexity. Combining both phases gives: • EGB-Sampling (black-box entropy): O(n(m + b)) ,• EGB-Logits (white-box entropy): O(n + bn ) = O(bn ) when branching dominates. These expressions match the complexity trend in the accompanying algorithm diagram: entropy sampling dominates Phase 1 for black-box models, while branch replay dominates when branch budgets are large. 

22 D Prompt Templates 

> 23

Prompt for Generating Diverse E-Commerce Cases 

Generate ONE focused e-commerce query that an {user_type} might have. User type: {user_type} Focus area: {focus} Complexity level: {complexity} Requirements based on COMPLEXITY LEVEL: {complexity} COMPLEXITY GUIDELINES: {self._get_complexity_guidelines(complexity)} For ALL queries, ensure: 1. Include SPECIFIC DETAILS that can be used as direct arguments in tools: • Product names and identifiers (e.g., “Sunset Yoga Mat (SKU: YM-2023-BL)”) • Order numbers (e.g., “Order #AB-12345678”) • FULL DATES WITH YEARS (e.g., “January 15, 2023” not just “January 15”) • Prices with currency (e.g., “$49.99”) • Specific quantities (e.g., “3 units”) 2. Include MULTIPLE DATA POINTS for tools to extract as parameters 3. For COMPLEX and ADVANCED queries, include: • Multiple constraints or conditions • Timing requirements or deadlines • Preferences with priorities • Historical context or previous actions • Special exceptions or unusual circumstances Examples of queries at different complexity levels: SIMPLE: “I need to track my order #RT-78256391 for the Samsung Galaxy Buds that I ordered on May 3, 2023. When will it be delivered?” MODERATE: “I need to return two items from my Order #112-9384756 placed on March 12, 2023: the Samsung Galaxy S22 with a cracked screen and the protective case. I want to keep the screen protector and charging cable. Can I get a return label for just those two items?” COMPLEX: “I need to modify my bulk order #BLK-2023-4872 placed on February 28, 2023 for my company. We ordered 50 Lenovo ThinkPad T14 laptops with i7 processors at $1,299 each, but now I need to change 15 of them to the i9 model which costs $1,599 each. We’ve already paid the deposit of $25,000 and delivery is scheduled for June 15, 2023. I need to know if this change will affect our delivery date and what additional payment is required.” ADVANCED: “I’m managing our company’s quarterly office supply order (PO #BZ-45721) placed on April 2, 2023 with scheduled delivery on April 20, 2023 across three locations. For the Chicago office (Location ID: CHI-005), we need to cancel the 12 ergonomic chairs ($259 each) due to their recent merger, but expedite the 15 monitor stands ($89 each) to arrive by April 15. For the Boston office (Location ID: BOS-002), we need to add 8 wireless keyboards ($65 each) and 8 wireless mice ($45 each) for new hires. The New York office (Location ID: NYC-001) shipment is fine as is, but we need to change the delivery window to after 2:00 PM. We’re eligible for the 12% corporate discount and already applied the SPRING2023 promo code for 5% off. How will these changes affect our total, and can all these modifications be accommodated before processing begins on April 10?” Return only the query text with no additional explanation.        

> Figure 9: Prompt to generate diverse e-commerce cases from different user perspectives. Example Variable Values: user_type alternates between “buyer” and “seller” based on query ID; focus is randomly selected from buyer focus areas (“product search with multiple conflicting requirements”, “order tracking for multiple items with shipping complications”, “complex product return with partial refund request”, etc.) or seller focus areas (“updating complex product variations and attributes”, “inventory management across multiple warehouses”, “implementing tiered pricing strategy with conditions”, etc.); complexity is one of “SIMPLE”, “MODERATE”, “COMPLEX”, or “ADVANCED” with weighted distribution of 0%, 10%, 80%, 10% respectively.

24 Prompt for Creating Specialized Tool Plans to Resolve E-Commerce Queries (Part 1) 

Create a plan with specialized tools to resolve this e-commerce query: User Query ({user_type}, {complexity} complexity): “{query}” {existing_tools_text} Please provide: 1. A HIERARCHICAL PLAN with: {plan_requirements} 2. For each SUBSTEP, indicate: • If it’s a high-level step: “tool”: “null” - NO EXCEPTIONS! • If no tool is needed: “tool”: “No tool required” • If a tool is needed: “tool”: “tool_name(param1=’value1’, param2=’value2’)” 3. CRITICAL: FIRST TOOL CALL arguments must come DIRECTLY from the query • Example: If query mentions “Order #AB-12345”, first tool should use order_id=’AB-12345’ • Extract actual values from the query text, don’t invent new values 4. CRITICAL: SUBSTEP DESCRIPTIONS MUST BE DISTINCT FROM TOOL NAMES • Make each substep description MEANINGFUL and CONTEXT-RICH • Do not create tool names that are Identical or Very Similar to substep descriptions. • BAD: “1.1 Get order details” when using “get_order_details” tool • GOOD: “1.1 Retrieve customer’s purchase history for Order #AB-123” when using “get_order_details” tool • Describe the PURPOSE and CONTEXT of the step, not just the action • Include relevant business context and specific goals for each step            

> Figure 10: Prompt for creating specialized tool plans (Part 1). Example Variable Values: user_type is either “buyer” or “seller”; complexity is one of “SIMPLE”, “MODERATE”, “COMPLEX”, or “ADVANCED”; query is the actual query text generated in stage 1. existing_tools_text: Dynamically generated list of top 30 most relevant tools from global tool library. plan_requirements: SIMPLE (2-3 high-level steps, 1-2 substeps each, 3-5 total); MODERATE (3-4 high-level steps, 1-3 substeps each, 6-8 total); COMPLEX (4-5 high-level steps, 2-3 substeps each, 8-12 total); ADVANCED (5-7 high-level steps, 2-4 substeps each, 12-16 total).

25 Prompt for Creating Specialized Tool Plans to Resolve E-Commerce Queries (Part 2) 

5. TOOL SELECTION AND DESIGN: • TRY REUSE EXISTING TOOLS whenever appropriate (from the list above) • If none of the existing tools are suitable, design NEW SPECIALIZED TOOLS that: 

– Have SPECIFIC, FOCUSED functionality (not general-purpose) 

– Use SIMPLE arguments (2-3 parameters maximum) 

– Return SIMPLE, FOCUSED results (1-3 fields maximum) 

– Follow snake_case naming convention 

– Avoid creating monolithic “do everything” tools 6. CRITICAL - AVOID TOOL REPETITION: 

• DO NOT use the same tool in consecutive substeps (e.g., avoid “2.1 xxx tool_A; 2.2 xxx tool_A”) • If you need to call the same tool multiple times, space them out with other operations • Each substep should ideally use a DIFFERENT tool to create diversity • Create specialized tools for different aspects rather than reusing generic ones 7. IMPORTANT - SEQUENTIAL DEPENDENCIES: • Later steps should use results from previous steps for sequential dependencies • Use the format OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_X.Y.field to reference previous outputs • Example: product_id=OUTPUT_FROM_STEP_1.2.product_id 

• Create a CHAIN of dependencies where each step builds on previous results • Ensure that tool outputs from early steps provide necessary inputs for later steps 8. FINAL STEP should produce a DIRECT RESULT that resolves the query • The last tool should return a clear outcome or answer • For example: confirmation message, success status, or direct result • FINAL STEPS should utilize outputs from earlier steps 9. FOR {complexity} COMPLEXITY: • {self._get_plan_complexity_guidelines(complexity)} 

> Figure 11: Prompt for creating specialized tool plans (Part 2). Focus on tool selection, reuse strategy, avoiding repetition, and establishing sequential dependencies between steps.

26 Prompt for Creating Specialized Tool Plans to Resolve E-Commerce Queries (Part 3) 

10. TOOL DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS: • Create tools that span different functional domains (retrieval, validation, processing, notification, etc.) • Avoid generic tools like “process_request” or “handle_query” • Instead create specific tools like “validate_return_window”, “calculate_refund_amount”, “send_confirmation_email” • Each tool should have a clear, single responsibility 

TOOL DESIGN PRINCIPLES: 

1. FOCUSED: Each tool should do ONE thing well 2. COMPOSABLE: Tools should work together through their inputs/outputs 3. REUSABLE: Create tools that could be useful in other scenarios 4. SIMPLE: Prefer multiple simple tools over one complex tool 5. DIVERSE: Create tools spanning different functional domains 6. SEQUENTIAL: Design tools to create natural dependencies and data flow 

Remember: 

• REUSE existing tools whenever appropriate 

• FIRST TOOL must use arguments DIRECTLY from the query • Keep tools SPECIALIZED with SIMPLE inputs and outputs • Ensure steps are SEQUENTIAL with clear dependencies • AVOID repeating the same tool in consecutive steps • FINAL STEP should provide a DIRECT RESOLUTION to the query • Return valid JSON only   

> Figure 12: Prompt for creating specialized tool plans (Part 3). Format response as JSON object with “plan” array (high-level steps with “tool”: “null”, and substeps with tool calls or “No tool required”) and “tools” array (defining all tools with “name”, “description”, “arguments”, and “results” fields). Complexity Guidelines: SIMPLE (1-2 tool calls, linear, minimal dependencies); MODERATE (2-4 tool calls, at least one dependency and conditional step); COMPLEX (4-7 tool calls, multiple dependencies, validation, branching paths); ADVANCED (7+ tool calls, multi-stage workflow, complex dependencies, edge case handling, maximum tool diversity).

27 Prompt for Generating Diverse E-Commerce Tools 

Generate {batch_size} DIVERSE e-commerce tools with COMPLETELY UNIQUE NAMES. 

TOOL NAMING REQUIREMENTS: 

1. Each tool name MUST be UNIQUE and use snake_case format 2. NEVER use any of these existing names: {names_str} 3. Create DISTINCTIVE names that avoid generic patterns 4. Consider these name patterns for inspiration: {name_pattern_text} 5. Each tool name should reflect its SPECIFIC FUNCTION and DOMAIN 6. VERIFY that each name is different from all others in your response 

TOOL ASSIGNMENTS - Create exactly one tool for EACH of these specific domains: {do-mains_text} 

SAMPLE TOOL STRUCTURE: {json.dumps(sample_tool, indent=2)} 

TOOL REQUIREMENTS: 

1. Match each tool precisely to its assigned domain above 2. Include 1-3 SIMPLE arguments with clear purposes 3. Return 1-3 FOCUSED result fields 4. Include “query_id”: “dummy” in each tool 5. Follow the exact JSON structure of the sample Return a JSON array containing {batch_size} tools with UNIQUE names: 

[{tool1}, {tool2}, ... ]

ONLY return the JSON array with no additional text. 

Figure 13: Prompt for generating diverse e-commerce tools with unique names. Example Variable Values: 

batch_size is configurable (typically 10 or 20, default 10). names_str is a comma-separated string of 20 ran-dom existing tool names to avoid duplication (e.g., “get_order_details, validate_return_window, calculate_refund, search_products, update_inventory, generate_shipping_label, process_payment, send_notification, track_shipment, analyze_sales, manage_promotions, verify_address, calculate_tax, check_stock, create_invoice, update_customer, generate_report, schedule_delivery, process_return, validate_coupon”). name_pattern_text consists of 4 ran-domly selected naming patterns from: “feature_specific_domain, domain_specific_action, specialized_task_handler, domain_analyzer, action_target_generator, domain_insight_provider, specialized_workflow_automation, tar-get_specific_optimizer”. domains_text is a numbered list of specific domains (one per tool) from 100 predefined diverse domains covering: Product management (catalog, variants, bundling, photography assessment, competitive analysis, recommendations, sourcing, limited editions, warranties, etc.), Shipping & logistics (delivery, warehousing, returns, tracking, etc.), etc. sample_tool is a randomly selected existing tool or default structure containing: 

name , description , query_id , arguments (with type, properties, and argument details), and results (with type, properties, and result field details). 

28 Prompt for Categorizing E-Commerce Tools into Functional Domains 

Analyze these e-commerce tools and categorize them into functional domains. 

TOOLS TO CATEGORIZE: {json.dumps(batch_tools, indent=2)} 

PREDEFINED CATEGORIES: {json.dumps(self.categories, indent=2)} 

INSTRUCTIONS: 

1. For each tool, assign it to the MOST APPROPRIATE category from the predefined list 2. If a tool could fit multiple categories, choose the PRIMARY function 3. Consider the tool’s main purpose and typical use case 4. Return a JSON object mapping tool names to their categories 

Return format: 

{"tool_name_1": "Category Name", "tool_name_2": "Category Name", ... }

ONLY return the JSON object with no additional text. 

Figure 14: Prompt for categorizing e-commerce tools into functional domains. Example Variable Values: 

batch_tools is a batch of 10-20 tools to categorize, each containing name , description , arguments , and 

results fields (e.g., “get_order_details”, “calculate_shipping_cost”, etc.). self.categories is a predefined list of 15 functional domain categories: “Order Management”, “Product Management”, “Inventory Management”, “Shipping & Logistics”, “Payment Processing”, “Customer Management”, “Returns & Refunds”, “Pricing & Promo-tions”, “Analytics & Reporting”, “Search & Discovery”, “Reviews & Ratings”, “Notifications & Communication”, “Authentication & Security”, “Marketplace Integration”, and “Content Management”. 

29 Prompt for Generating Tool Simulation Outputs 

Generate a realistic JSON output for this e-commerce tool call. QUERY: “{context[’query’]}” CURRENT STEP: “{context[’step’]}” TOOL: • Name: {tool_name} • Description: {tool_def.get(’description’, ’No description available’)} ARGUMENTS USED: {json.dumps(args, indent=2)} PREVIOUS TOOL OUTPUTS: {json.dumps(context[’previous_outputs’], indent=2) if con-text[’previous_outputs’] else “No previous outputs”} REQUIRED OUTPUT PROPERTIES: {json.dumps(result_props, indent=2)} EXAMPLE FORMAT: {json.dumps(example_output, indent=2)} COMPLEXITY LEVEL: {complexity} {complexity_guidance} INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Generate SPECIFIC, REALISTIC values consistent with the original query 2. Maintain CONSISTENCY with previous tool outputs 3. Include ALL required properties in the tool’s result schema 4. Values should match their expected data types 5. {“This is the FINAL TOOL in the plan. Make sure the output provides a DIRECT RESULT that clearly resolves the user’s request (e.g., confirmation, status, or answer)” if is_final_step else “Keep output focused and relevant to the step”} RETURN ONLY THE JSON OUTPUT OBJECT.                      

> Figure 15: Prompt for generating tool simulation outputs. Example Variable Values: context[’query’] is the original e-commerce query text; context[’step’] is the current step description from the plan; tool_name is the name of the tool being called; tool_def is the tool definition object containing description and other metadata; args
> is a JSON object containing the arguments passed to the tool; context[’previous_outputs’] is a JSON object or array containing outputs from previously executed tools (null or empty if no previous outputs); result_props
> is a JSON schema object defining required output properties with types and descriptions; example_output is a sample JSON object showing the expected output format; complexity is one of “SIMPLE”, “MODERATE”, “COMPLEX”, or “ADVANCED”; complexity_guidance is text providing specific guidance for generating outputs at the given complexity level; is_final_step is a boolean indicating whether this tool is the final step in the plan (affects instruction 5).

30