Title: ASTRA: Adaptive Semantic Tree Reasoning Architecture for Complex Table Question Answering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08999v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:31:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# ASTRA: Adaptive Semantic Tree Reasoning Architecture for Complex Table Question Answering 

Xiaoke Guo 1, Songze Li 1, Zhiqiang Liu 1, Zhaoyan Gong 1,Yuanxiang Liu 1, Huajun Chen 1, Wen Zhang 1,*

> 1

Zhejiang University 

{guoxiaoke, zhang.wen}@zju.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Table serialization remains a critical bottle-neck for Large Language Models (LLMs) in complex table question answering, hindered by challenges such as structural neglect, represen-tation gaps, and reasoning opacity. Existing serialization methods fail to capture explicit hi-erarchies and lack schema flexibility, while cur-rent tree-based approaches suffer from limited semantic adaptability. To address these limita-tions, we propose ASTRA (Adaptive Semantic 

Tree Reasoning Architecture) including two main modules, AdaSTR and DuTR . First, we introduce AdaSTR , which leverages the global semantic awareness of LLMs to reconstruct tables into Logical Semantic Trees. This se-rialization explicitly models hierarchical de-pendencies and employs an adaptive mecha-nism to optimize construction strategies based on table scale. Second, building on this struc-ture, we present DuTR , a dual-mode reason-ing framework that integrates tree-search-based textual navigation for linguistic alignment and symbolic code execution for precise verifica-tion. Experiments on complex table bench-marks demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved re-markable success across a wide spectrum of natural language tasks. As a fundamental format for data storage and presentation, tables—particularly com-plex tables characterized by hierarchical headers and merged cells—are ubiquitous in high-value do-mains. Consequently, the community has devoted significant efforts to enhance the tabular reasoning and question-answering capabilities of LLMs. Recent studies (Fang et al., 2024; Sui et al., 2024b) have identified table serialization—the pro-cess of converting structured tables into sequential representations compatible with LLM inputs—as a 

> *Corresponding author.

critical bottleneck for Table Question Answering (TableQA). Specifically, we observe that current serialization methods face four major challenges when handling complex tables: (1) Structural Ne-glect: Complex tables often contain intricate lay-outs with hierarchical relationships and semantic dependencies embedded in their structure, which LLMs frequently overlook. (2) Representation Gap: The intrinsic representational mismatch be-tween two-dimensional structured tables and the one-dimensional sequential nature of LLMs hin-ders the precise localization of fine-grained evi-dence, which is important for reasoning over com-plex tables. (3) Reasoning Opacity: Existing methods directly employ LLMs for numerical com-putation over tables, which function as a black box lacking interpretable execution traces, leading to unverified numerical hallucinations. (4) Schema Inflexibility: Complex tables exhibit significant structural diversity. Existing table parsing strate-gies that rely on rigid, rule-based approaches fail to adapt to irregular layouts, limiting generalization. Despite the variety of existing approaches, none address these challenges simultaneously: First, graph-based approaches like GraphOTTER (Li et al., 2024) atomize tables into triples. While this strategy mitigates schema inflexibility, it still fails to explicitly represent the hierarchical structures and semantic information in complex tables. Con-versely, methods such as RelationalCoder (Dong et al., 2025b) attempt to convert complex tables into relational formats. Although these approaches can elucidate semantic associations among head-ers via schemas and facilitate the integration of Text-to-SQL methodologies (Wang et al., 2024b), they frequently introduce data redundancy or spar-sity when applied to asymmetric structures. For instance, a ‘Laptop’ sub-table may contain a ‘GPU’ attribute, whereas a ‘Mouse’ sub-table lacks ‘GPU’ but includes ‘DPI’; forced integration into a unified schema induces data sparsity, while split storage in-                                    

> arXiv:2604.08999v1 [cs.CL] 10 Apr 2026 Characteristics
> Private residence
> →Yukon –per cent :F
> →Nunavut –per cent :67
> Commercial / Public
> {Sex of accused:
> Male
> →Yukon –per cent :67 …… }
> →Yukon –per cent :68
> →Nunavut –per cent :80
> …… }
> {Location of the Incident:
> √Explicit Hierarchy
> & semantic Context √Representation Alignment
> √Schema Flexibility √Symbolic Compatibility
> Entity
> Attribute subcategory
> Category
> [Male, Female]
> Sex of accused Yukon
> Percent
> Coherent contextual flow
> A
> No Sparsity/redundancy
> B
> Male Female
> Other
> Private ……
> (the) Characteristics
> (of) Sex of accused,
> (specif -ically) Male, (the)
> Yukon percent is 68.
> Reasoning Path:
> Root Leaf
> Intuitive structural
> hierarchy & semantics
> Robust numerics &
> Verifiable provenance
> Ntree_table
> [“ Sex of accused ”]
> [“ Male ”]
> [“ Yukon –percent ”]
> >>> 68
> Female

Figure 1: Key desiderata for robust table serialization and their instantiation in AdaSTR. 

troduces data redundancy. Furthermore, while cur-rent tree-based solutions like ST-Raptor (Tang et al., 2025a) demonstrate the utility of hierarchical repre-sentations, their reliance on rule-based construction renders them fragile (details are discussed in Ap-pendix D). Crucially, they fail to discern between physical hierarchy and semantic associations. To achieve a more effective serialization that enhances LLMs’ reasoning capabilities over com-plex tables, we propose Ada ptive Semantic Tree 

Reconstruction ( AdaSTR ), as illustrated in Table 1, which simultaneously addresses the challenges by satisfying the following requirements: 

Explicit Hierarchy & Semantic Context: To resolve Structural Neglect , we make the serial-ization preserve the explicit hierarchical structure inherent in table headers (e.g., taxonomic levels like Category → Subcategory ), while simulta-neously revealing the relational implicit seman-tic dependencies within the data dimension (e.g., Entity ↔ Attribute mappings). This dual focus en-ables a more precise representation of the complex table’s global semantics. 

Representation Alignment: To mitigate Repre-sentation Gap , we design the serialization to bridge                           

> Method Explicit Hierarchy Semantic Context Representation Alignment Schema Flexibility Symbolic Compatibility
> Textual Serialization ▲✗✗▲✗
> (Html/MarkDown)
> Triples ✗✗✗✓▲
> (GraphOTTER)
> Relational ▲✓▲✗✓
> (TabFormer)
> Physical Tree ✓✗▲✓✓
> (ST-Raptor)
> Semantic Tree ✓✓✓✓✓
> (Ours)

Table 1: Comparison of serialization methods ( ✓ Sup-port; ▲ Partial; ✗ No Support). 

the 2D-to-1D modality gap by expressing tabu-lar content as coherent, natural-language-like se-quences that align with the distribution of LLM’s pre-training data (Wu et al., 2025). Such represen-tation alignment not only enhances comprehension for LLMs but also facilitates the retrieval of critical content relevant to specific queries. 

Symbolic Compatibility: To tackle Reasoning Opacity , we structure the serialization to support 

code-based symbolic reasoning. This not only mit-igates LLMs’ weaknesses in numerical computa-tions (Liu et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024a) but also ensures deterministic and verifiable data prove-nance, allowing users to validate exact data sources. 

Schema Flexibility: To overcome Schema Inflex-ibility , we optimize the serialization to avoid intro-ducing irrelevant redundancy that exacerbates the model’s inference burden, ensuring robust adapt-ability across arbitrary table formats. As illustrated in Figure 1, our serialized seman-tic tree captures explicit hierarchy and semantic context through node-to-node relationships. To effectively leverage this structure, we introduce 

DuTR (Du al-Mode Tree Reasoning). By incorpo-rating tree-search-based textual reasoning, DuTR efficiently navigates the tree structure to locate crit-ical information, where the resulting paths with aligned representations serve as coherent text streams. Furthermore, the tree structure inher-ently offers schema flexibility and can be stored in Python dictionary format to facilitate interpretable 

symbolic reasoning . To balance efficiency and ac-curacy, we also introduce an adaptive mechanism that dynamically selects tree construction strategies based on table scale and token density .We name our unified method ASTRA (Adaptive 

Semantic Tree Reasoning Architecture), which integrates the adaptive construction module (AdaSTR ) with the reasoning engine ( DuTR ). Specifically, DuTR treats the tree simultaneously as a navigable text corpus for semantic retrieval and a structured object for symbolic execution, ef-fectively combining the semantic flexibility of lin-guistic retrieval with the computational precision of symbolic execution. Overall, our main contribu-tions are as follows: 

• We identify four critical challenges that consti-tute the central bottleneck in complex TableQA, and distill the corresponding desiderata for an effective serialization strategy to address them. 

• We introduce AdaSTR, which exploits LLMs’ global semantic awareness to transform a table into a semantic-tree representation. Building on this representation, we further propose the DuTR framework, which achieves high accuracy while providing strong interpretability for table QA. 

• Driven by adaptive tree construction and hy-brid reasoning, ASTRA achieves SOTA per-formance on multiple benchmarks, demonstrat-ing superior generalization and robustness across varied and irregular table formats. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Adapting Tabular Data for LLMs Textual Table Serialization. Methods utilizing Markdown, HTML, or separators (Sui et al., 2024a) serialize tables into token sequences. However, the syntax of these formats deviates from natural lin-guistic flow, and it is extremely difficult to retrieve relevant information within such structures, hinder-ing the model’s ability to understand large tables. 

Structure-Aware Model Adaptation. Beyond naive serialization, model-centric approaches ex-plicitly encode structure via specialized embed-dings (Korkmaz and Del Rio Chanona, 2024; He et al., 2025), dedicated table encoders (Li et al., 2025), or continued pre-training (Li et al., 2023; Su et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b). However, these methods typically incur significant adaptation over-head when migrating to new backbones. 

Intermediate Structural Representations. To enhance table understanding without training, re-searchers have investigated transforming tables into model-friendly formats (Tang et al., 2025b). Ap-proaches range from relational format (Dong et al., 2025b), which often suffers from data sparsity on asymmetric layouts, to triple-based atomization (Li et al., 2024), which tends to obscure explicit seman-tic hierarchies. More recently, tree-based methods like ST-Raptor (Tang et al., 2025a) have been pro-posed; however, their reliance on brittle physical layout heuristics limits their robustness against di-verse formatting variations. 

2.2 Table Reasoning Paradigms 

Table reasoning typically follows two paradigms (Liu et al., 2023b) : Textual reasoning (End-to-End) directly generates natural-language rationales and answers from the serialized table context, but may incur numerical errors (Wei et al., 2023); Symbolic Reasoning (program-aided) generates executable code (e.g., SQL, Python) for precision (Chen et al., 2023). However, it can be sensitive to complex table structures (Details are provided in Appendix E). Our Semantic Tree framework unifies these paradigms by serving as a navigable context for semantic retrieval and a structured object for code generation, effectively combining robustness with precision. 

3 Method 

The goal of TableQA is to synthesize an answer 

A for a natural language query Q, grounded in a source table T . While prior benchmarks and meth-ods have largely focused on flat tables—typically featuring a single header row where each data cell maps uniquely to one header—we focus on the more challenging task of Complex Table QA .

3.1 Method Overview 

To address the structural challenges inherent in complex table QA, we formulate the problem as a multi-stage reasoning process consisting of struc-tural transformation and reasoning execution. 

General Formulation. First, the raw table T is processed by a representation function τ to yield a model-readable structured view ˜T = τ (T ). We define τ as a generalized transformation function, which abstracts the complex layout into a machine-friendly format. Subsequently, a model Mθ serves as the core reasoning engine within a workflow Φ.The model interacts with the transformed view ˜T

and the query Q to derive the final answer: 

A = Φ M( ˜T , Q ) (1) characte         

> ristics { " table_type ": "complex",
> “analysis_reason ”: “The table has a ……",
> "hierarchy_keys ": [" characteristics "],
> "semantic_groups ": {
> "location of the incident ": [" private
> residence ", " commercial or institutional
> establishment or public place ", " other "], ……],
> "value_leaves ": [" yukon -percent ",
> "northwest territories -percent ", ……]
> }
> }
> Location of
> the incident
> Private
> residence other ……
> ……
> Yukon –
> percent: f
> Northwest
> territories –
> precent: “35”
> ……

## ……   

> Unified
> format [[“ characteristics”,” Yukon”, ……],[“”,”percent”……]]
> Unified
> format

+ +    

> [“ characteristics”,”Yukon –percent”, ……]
> Normalized Headers
> Unified
> format
> DSP SRE PSS
> Adaptive Synthesis
> Generating tree ……
> Evalu ator
> Coverage
> Struct
> Reflective
> Switch
> Token Density,
> Table Scale
> Feature Analysis:
> Final Sem.Tree

Hierarchy Definition   

> LLM
> LLM
> JSON XLSX
> MARK
> Standardize
> Normalized
> Headers LLM
> Stage1:Header Normalization
> Stage2:Hierarchy Identification
> Stage3:Tree Construction
> Refinement Loop
> Information
> Omission
> Structural
> Deficiency
> Rebuild
> Hierarchy
> Append
> Missing
> Values
> 𝐻 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚
> 𝐷 ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑟
> ෨𝑇

Figure 2: Overview of the Adaptive Semantic Tree Reconstruction process. 

Method Instantiation. Specifically, our method ASTRA comprises two core phases, mapping specifically to τ and Φ: (1) AdaSTR ( τ → Ta-ble Serialization) , which transforms a complex table T into a semantic tree ˜T ; and (2) DuTR (Φ → Table Reasoning) , which integrates inno-vative tree-based textual reasoning and symbolic code execution, culminating in an answer selection module to determine the optimal final answer. 

3.2 AdaSTR: Adaptive Semantic Tree Reconstruction 

As illustrated in Figure 2, the AdaSTR framework is orchestrated through three interconnected mod-ules designed to ensure structural robustness and semantic fidelity across heterogeneous tables. 

3.2.1 Semantic Parsing and Schema Detection 

Given a complex table T , we first standardize it into a unified format—a flat ordered list structure l,establishing a reference for the subsequent quality assessment. We then employ a Header Identifica-tion & Normalization (HIN) module. As shown in Figure 2 (stage 1), raw tables often contain sub-headers like Percent that are meaningless without their parent context; HIN resolves this by consolidating vertical dependencies into qualified keys (e.g., merging Yukon with Percent to form 

Yukon-Percent ). This yields a normalized header list Hnorm , which excavates the implicit semantic context, anchoring isolated attributes to their corresponding entities. The subsequent criti-cal phase is Hierarchy Identification (HID) . As depicted in Stage 2 in Figure 2, the HID mod-ule harnesses the LLM to mine Hidden Semantic Groups from Hnorm . Continuing the previous ex-ample, LLM observes that Yukon-Percent and 

Northwest-Percent share an identical struc-ture (Region-Metric). Consequently, it abstracts them into a latent high-level concept (e.g., Regional Statistics ), thereby organizing the extracted seman-tic units into an explicit hierarchy. Finally, the HID module synthesizes the identified hierarchical structure into a formal representation Dhier .

3.2.2 Adaptive Tree Synthesis Strategies 

This step transforms the table T into a semantic tree ˜T given Dhier . Considering the heterogene-ity of real-world tables—ranging from massive, sparse datasets to text-dense complex tables—a monolithic construction strategy cannot effectively balance efficiency and accuracy. To address this, we devise three adaptive Tree construction modes, with the selection strategy in Appendix F. 

Direct Semantic Parsing (DSP Mode). This mode is optimized for standard complex tables with moderate structural complexity and manageable size. In this setting, the LLM functions as an end-to-end generator, directly outputting the complete semantic tree ˜T based on the parsed schema Dhier .

Symbolic Reference Encoding (SRE Mode). 

Tailored for verbose-content tables (e.g., financial reports) where generating full textual content is in-8              

> 67
> 31245
> 8
> 67
> 31245
> B:Root -to -Leaf A:Leaf -to -Root
> 35421
> Embedding model
> Adaptive Tree Navigation Symbolic Tree Manipulation
> selection
> Top -k
> Query LLM

+            

> Python Code
> Python
> Sandbox
> Self -Correction
> LLM
> Symbolic Answer
> Answer Selector
> Query
> Tree
> Skeleton
> Semantic
> Tree
> Code Examples
> Output Input Evidence nodes
> 863
> 875
> Top -k
> Guide
> 63
> 75863OR
> Final Answer Selection
> Error Feedback
> Answer found
> Textual Answer
> Textual Answer
> Symbolic Answer Original Table Final Answer
> No -evidence node

Figure 3: Overview of the Dual-Mode Tree Reasoning process. 

efficient and risks diluting the model’s structural focus, we introduce a Symbolic Placeholder Strat-egy. Inspired by address-based compressed encod-ings like SpreadsheetLLM (Dong et al., 2025c), we employ coordinate abstraction. Guided by the schema Dhier and a coordinate-tagged view Tgrid ,the LLM is instructed to generate cell addresses 

(e.g., A1 notation like C7 ) as placeholders within the tree nodes. This yields a compact tree skeleton. Subsequently, a script retrieves the original text via these coordinates to populate the tree ˜T . This ap-proach significantly reduces token overhead while preserving structural precision. 

Programmatic Structure Synthesis (PSS Mode). 

Targeting large-scale tables with repetitive substruc-tures, the LLM leverages Dhier and Tcoord to syn-thesize a loop-based construction script. This script iterates over the coordinate space to instantiate the full tree ˜T , ensuring scalability and efficiency. 

3.2.3 Evaluator-Guided Refinement Loop 

To mitigate errors, we employ an Evaluator-Guided Refinement Loop . The Evaluator val-idates ˜T via: (1) Structural Integrity , which checks path consistency against grid coordinates to prevent logical hallucinations; and (2) Informa-tion Coverage , which measures the percentage of mapped cells to verify no semantic information is omitted. If the composite score falls below a thresh-old, the LLM is instructed to iteratively revise ˜T

based on feedback for up to maximum iterations. Implementation details are in Appendix F. 

3.3 DuTR: Dual-Mode Tree Reasoning 

As illustrated in Figure 3, we propose a dual-mode reasoning framework grounded in the semantic tree 

˜T . This structure serves as a foundation for both symbolic manipulation and context-aware retrieval. 

3.3.1 Adaptive Tree Navigation 

This module analyzes the query to select an optimal traversal strategy ( Leaf-to-Root or Root-to-Leaf ), filtering critical paths for the answer. A key ad-vantage of the semantic tree is that it binds each value to its header-path semantics, transforming fragmented cells into context-rich nodes, enabling reliable semantic retrieval on complex tables. 

Strategy A: Leaf-to-Root (Algorithm 2). As illustrated in Panel A of Figure 3, we first filter the top-k1 leaf subset Lrel based on query–leaf semantic similarity. Then, it iteratively expands the context depth d: at each step, paths associated with Lrel are merged into the evidence set C. The LLM evaluates whether C is sufficient to derive the answer A; if not, the system increments d to include broader parent context until reaching Dmax .This strategy excels in aggregation queries , such as conditional counting of dispersed data points. 

Strategy B: Root-to-Leaf (Algorithm 3). As de-picted in Panel B of Figure 3, the system retrieves the top-k2 root-to-leaf paths Ptopk via semantic similarity, which serve as global semantic guidance 

G. We then perform a top-down traversal using a stack S. At each step, the LLM selects a subset of promising child nodes Nsel to expand, conditioned on query Q and guidance G. Upon reaching leaf nodes, the path information is accumulated into the evidence set C. The LLM dynamically evaluates whether C is sufficient to derive the answer A; if affirmative, the traversal triggers early stopping, effectively bypassing the remaining paths. This strategy is well-suited for lookup-style queries re-quiring precise, localized evidence. 

3.3.2 Symbolic Tree Manipulation 

Pure textual reasoning is prone to error in multi-step queries involving aggregation or complex log-ical predicates (Zhang et al., 2024a). Thus, as il-lustrated in Figure 3 (top-right), we incorporate symbolic reasoning to ensure computational preci-sion. To accommodate the LLM’s context window and focus on logical generation, we abstract the semantic tree into a structural skeleton devoid of verbose values. Furthermore, we construct tar-geted code examples (e.g., selection, aggregation, and comparison) for tree operations and provide a secure execution environment. If a runtime error occurs, the system enters a Self-Correction Loop ,feeding error traces back to the LLM to trigger code regeneration. This approach unifies accuracy and stability in complex logical reasoning. 

3.4 Final Answer Selection 

As shown in Figure 3 (bottom-right), our method yields two candidates: a Textual Answer from tree navigation and a Symbolic Answer from code execution. To resolve conflicts, we employ a lightweight, open-source LLM as an Answer Selec-tor. When answers differ, it evaluates both against the original table to determine the plausible one. We term this Adaptive Selection .

4 Experiment 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate on three complex table benchmarks: (1) AIT-QA (Katsis et al., 2022): A domain-specific dataset (airline industry) character-ized by deeply nested headers. (2) HiTab (Cheng et al., 2022): A widely used benchmark contain-ing hierarchical tables extracted from statistical reports, emphasizing numerical aggregation. (3) 

SSTQA (Tang et al., 2025a): A dataset introduced by the ST-Raptor framework, included to assess generalization on semi-structured tables. 

Baselines. We compare our method against four categories of baselines: (1) Foundation Mod-els : GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024), DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), and a recent reasoning-focused model OpenAI o3 (OpenAI, 2025). All are prompted via standard textual se-rialization to benchmark their baseline reasoning performance. (2) Prompting/Tool-augmented Methods : including EEDP (Srivastava et al., 2025), which relies on structured prompting, and 

E5 (Zhang et al., 2024c), which adopts a agen-tic workflow; (3) Table-Specific Adapted Mod-els : TableGPT2 (Su et al., 2024) and TableL-lama (Zhang et al., 2024b), which improve tab-ular reasoning via additional table-centric pre-training or instruction tuning. (4) Intermediate-Representation Methods : GraphOTTER (Li et al., 2024), which represents tables as triples, and ST-Raptor (Tang et al., 2025a), a tree-based baseline. 

Metrics. Rigid string-matching metrics (e.g. Ex-act Match) often fail to capture semantic equiva-lence in generative tasks. To ensure robust evalu-ation, we employ LLMs as evaluators. Following recent methodologies validating the reliability of LLM-as-a-Judge frameworks (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c; Dubois et al., 2025), we utilize GPT-5 as a binary judge: given a prediction and the gold answer, it outputs CORRECT /INCORRECT .We parse the label to compute Accuracy (Acc). 

Implementations. For fairness, we use 

DeepSeek-V3-250324 as the backbone for all training-free methods, including our method (AdaSTR and DuTR), ( E5 , EEDP ), and ( GraphOT-TER , ST-Raptor ). Details are in Appendix A. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 2 demonstrates ASTRA ’s strong perfor-mance and trade-offs between the two reasoning modes (Zhang et al., 2024a). On SSTQA, rich in semantically intensive questions, Textual Rea-soning ( 79 .8% ) outperforms Symbolic Reasoning (75 .3% ) by effectively capturing semantic nuances. Conversely, on HiTab, which features numerical ag-gregation, Symbolic Reasoning ( 89 .3% ) surpasses Textual Reasoning ( 82 .2% ), validating its compu-tational accuracy. Notably, ASTRA (90 .1% on HiTab) outperforms o3 (85 .3% ), validating the ne-cessity of structural guidance. In contrast, rule-based ST-Raptor shows limited generalization on AIT-QA ( 62 .7% ) and HiTab ( 49 .0% ), exposing its fragility across diverse table layouts. Model AITQA SSTQA HiTab 

(1) Foundation Models 

DeepSeek-V3 78.5 63.2 82.0 GPT-4o 80.6 66.4 78.6 o3 89.1 78.2 85.3 

(2) Prompting/Tool-augmented Methods 

E5 87.1 70.2 85.1 EEDP 85.6 76.8 79.2 

(3) Table-Specific Adapted Models 

TableLlama † - 40.4 64.7 TableGPT2-72B † - - 75.6 

(4) Intermediate-Representation Methods 

GraphOTTER 90.4 71.5 88.8 ST-Raptor 62.7 71.1 49.0 

(5) ASTRA 

Textual Reasoning 86.1 79.8 82.2 Symbolic Reasoning 87.3 75.3 89.3 

Adaptive Selection 91.6 81.9 90.1 

Oracle 93.5 86.1 94.1 

Table 2: Accuracy (%) on AIT-QA, SST-QA, and HiTab. 

Bold denotes best, underlined denotes second best. †

indicates results cited from prior literature. Oracle rep-resents the theoretical upper bound via ideal selection between Textual and Symbolic reasoning. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

We conducted ablation studies on SSTQA to ex-amine the impact of distinct components on tree reconstruction and reasoning efficacy. 

Analysis of AdaSTR. Table 3 presents the ab-lation results for the tree construction phase. The full AdaSTR pipeline achieves the highest perfor-mance across all metrics, demonstrating the syn-ergy between the Evaluator-Guided Loop and the synthesis strategies. (1) Impact of Evaluator-Guided Loop: Removing the evaluator reduces Average Coverage ( 0.929 → 0.745 ), proving the loop effectively rectifies generation errors. (2) Im-pact of Synthesis Strategies: Disabling the adap-tive synthesis strategies (i.e., defaulting to static DSP) leads to a substantial drop in the Minimum 

Coverage Rate ( 0.153 ). This underscores that SRE and PSS are vital for handling large-scale complex tables where basic prompting fails. 

Remarks on Metric Absolute Values. Results for Structural Accuracy and Coverage are partially influenced by artifacts in dataset annotation and the inherent effects of information filtering, rather than solely model generation errors. Detailed analysis on evaluation scores is provided in Appendix F.                 

> Tree Construction
> (DeepSeek-V3)
> Coverage Rate Struct Acc Avg Min Avg Min AdaSTR 0.929 0.738 0.792 0.654
> w/o Evaluator-Guided 0.745 0.473 0.698 0.143 w/o Synthesis Strategies 0.795 0.153 0.643 0.457

Table 3: Ablation of AdaSTR . We report Average (Avg) and Minimum (Min) Coverage Rate and Structural Ac-curacy to evaluate robustness across diverse tables.                         

> Configuration Acc (%) ∆
> Adaptive Tree Navigation 79.84 -w/o Embedding Model 71.34 -8.50 w/o Dynamic Switching --
> Force Root-to-Leaf 77.23 -2.61
> Force Leaf-to-Root 75.65 -4.19
> Symbolic Tree Manipulation 75.26 -w/o Code Examples 70.42 -4.84 w/o Structural Skeleton 71.73 -3.53 w/o Self-Correction Loop 73.69 -1.57
> Impact of Data Representation
> Textual Serialization (Direct Prompting) 63.20 -
> Semantic Tree (Direct Prompting) 70.55 +7.35

Table 4: Ablation analysis of DuTR (Deepseek-V3) .We report Accuracy (%) and performance change ( ∆)vs. full configuration per mode. Bottom evaluates repre-sentational benefits of the tree structure. 

Analysis of DuTR. Table 4 isolates the contribu-tions of specific sub-modules: 

(1) Textual Reasoning Ablation: Removing the path guide drops performance to 71 .34% (∆ −

8.50% ), confirming that semantic navigation pro-vides essential global guidance. Furthermore, our dynamic variant ( 79 .84% ) outperforms fixed strate-gies (max 77 .23% ), validating the necessity of query-adaptive traversal. 

(2) Symbolic Reasoning Ablation: Omitting few-shot examples triggers the sharpest decline (70 .42% ), followed by skeleton removal ( 71 .73% ), highlighting format guidance and context filtering as critical drivers for effective program generation. 

(3) Intrinsic Advantage of Data Representation. 

To isolate representation gains, we compared static 

Semantic Tree inputs against Textual Serializa-tion . Table 11 (bottom) confirms that even without advanced reasoning, the Static Tree ( 70 .55% ) out-performs the Raw Table baseline ( 63 .20% ), validat-ing the intrinsic benefit of hierarchical serialization. 

4.4 Efficiency Analysis 

Table 5 decomposes latency into offline Tree Con-struction and online QA Inference. Our method ensures superior online efficiency and faster con-struction than ST-Raptor via PSS mode, avoiding Method AIT-QA HiTab SST-QA Tree QA Tree QA Tree QA 

ST-Raptor 55.73 31.18 139.61 26.61 233.19 41.36 GraphOTTER - 19.54 - 22.29 - 21.83 

Ours 29.18 7.80 43.42 6.19 93.71 11.62 

Table 5: Comparison of time efficiency (in seconds) across different datasets. We record the latency for both the Tree Construction phase (Tree) and the Question Answering phase (QA). “-” denotes the method does not involve a tree construction phase. 

Figure 4: Performance breakdown by question type and difficulty for DuTR and baselines. 

costly element-wise recursion. While GraphOT-TER builds faster, its high inference latency proves inefficient for multi-turn sessions. Amortized anal-ysis ( Tavg = Ttree /N + Tqa ) confirms our method surpasses GraphOTTER when query count N ≥ 3

(AIT-QA/HiTab) or N ≥ 10 (SSTQA), offering an optimal accuracy-efficiency trade-off. 

4.5 Diagnostic Analysis 

We conduct a fine-grained analysis on SSTQA. (1) 

Complementarity of Reasoning Modes. Figure 4 (a) confirms the synergy of Dual-Mode design. Tex-tual Reasoning excels in Semantic tasks, while 

Symbolic Reasoning dominates Numeric Compu-tation . Conversely, GraphOTTER struggles in se-mantic categories due to structural and semantic loss, a limitation resolved by our Semantic Tree. (2) Resilience to Query Complexity. Figure 4 (b) highlights robustness against increasing difficulty. While all models degrade on Hard queries, our method maintains stability via synergistic textual-symbolic reasoning. 

4.6 Case Study 

To intuitively demonstrate how ASTRA addresses the serialization bottlenecks, we present a case on 

Structural Enumeration in Figure 5. The query requires enumerating all children under the parent category “Fixed Expenses". GraphOTTER fail due to the Representation Gap ; its triple-based format isolates cells as discrete entities, making it unable to capture the structural dependency of aggrega-                                                           

> Case Study: Enumeration on Complex Hierarchy
> Query: "How many items are listed in Fixed Expenses?"
> Gold Answer: 9 Table Snippet (Semantic Tree Representation):
> Manufacturing Overhead Budget
> ⊢Variable Overhead // Sibling Branch
> |⊢Indirect Labor ................ ...
> |⌞... (4 items omitted) ...
> ⌞Fixed Expenses // Target Branch
> ⊢Quarter 1
> |⊢Repair ........................ 2,500
> |⊢... (8 standard items) ...
> |⌞Cash Output ................. 16,635
> ⌞... (Quarter 2-4 omitted) ...
> Baselines (Failure Analysis)
> •GraphOTTER (Output: 5): Representation Gap.
> Retrieves only standard items (e.g., "Repair") but misses struc-turally bound rows (e.g., "Total", "Less"). •ST-Raptor (Output: 1): Structural Neglect.
> Overlooks the implicit parent-child hierarchy, treating the header “Fixed Expenses" as a single data point rather than a container. •EEDP (Output: 5): Reasoning Opacity.
> Relies on textual commonsense to identify “expenses" during CoT generation, ignoring structural aggregations (e.g., “Total") that don’t look like standard items.
> ASTRA (Ours)
> •Logic (Symbolic Tree Manipulation):
> target =tree['Manuf. Budget']['Fixed Expenses']['Q1'] Answer =len(target.keys())
> •Result: Correct (9) . The dictionary structure strictly enforces parent-child containment, ensuring all irregular items are counted.

Figure 5: A representative case study involving sibling branches and irregular children. ASTRA utilizes precise dictionary traversal to correctly enumerate all items. 

tion rows. ST-Raptor exhibits Structural Neglect ,erroneously regarding the parent header "Fixed Ex-penses" as an atomic data point. EEDP suffers from 

Reasoning Opacity ; by relying on purely textual inference, it introduces semantic bias —prioritizing the model’s parametric internal knowledge over the table’s explicit structural constraints—thereby hallucinating filters that exclude valid but irregular items. In contrast, ASTRA leverages its Semantic Tree representation to preserve explicit parent-child relationships. By navigating the tree structure, it successfully retrieves the complete subtree, demon-strating the critical need for Explicit Hierarchy 

and Semantic Context when handling complex nested headers. 

5 Conclusion 

We present ASTRA, a training-free method for semantic tree reconstruction that introduces a Text-Symbolic Reasoning paradigm to enhance tabular QA. By restoring explicit hierarchy, our approach achieves SOTA performance, outperforming ad-vanced reasoning models like OpenAI o3. No-tably, we find that the Semantic Tree representation alone—even without specialized reasoning mecha-nisms—yields superior performance compared to textual serializations. These findings offer a crit-ical insight: an explicit hierarchy enriched with semantic context is critical for unlocking the full reasoning potential of LLMs. 

Limitations 

While ASTRA achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance on complex table benchmarks, there remain avenues for future exploration tied to the inherent challenges of the task setting. First, regarding effi-ciency trade-offs: Our Semantic Tree construction is specifically optimized to disentangle the intricate dependencies in complex, hierarchical tables. For extremely simple flat tables where explicit hierar-chy is absent, this reconstruction process may incur a computational overhead compared to direct tex-tual serialization. Second, ASTRA primarily relies on textual and structural parsing. However, real-world complex tables often utilize visual cues (e.g., background colors, bold fonts) to convey implicit semantic constraints. Incorporating multi-modal vision encoders to capture these stylistic features remains a promising direction. 

Ethics Statement 

In this paper, we introduce ASTRA, a framework for complex table question answering. Our experi-mental evaluation is conducted using publicly avail-able and widely recognized benchmarks, includ-ing AIT-QA, HiTab, and SSTQA. These datasets are constructed from open-domain sources (e.g., Wikipedia, public financial reports) and, to the best of our knowledge, do not contain any personally identifiable information or offensive content. Fur-thermore, all Large Language Models employed in this work were utilized in strict adherence to their respective usage policies and safety guidelines. We believe that our work does not pose any significant ethical concerns. 

References 

Mubashara Akhtar, Abhilash Shankarampeta, Vivek Gupta, Arpit Patil, Oana Cocarascu, and Elena Sim-perl. 2023. Exploring the numerical reasoning capa-bilities of language models: A comprehensive anal-ysis on tabular data. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 15391–15405, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Lang Cao and Hanbing Liu. 2025. Tablemaster: A recipe to advance table understanding with language models. Preprint , arXiv:2501.19378. Wenhu Chen. 2023. Large language models are few(1)-shot table reasoners. Preprint , arXiv:2210.06710. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2023. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from rea-soning for numerical reasoning tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2211.12588. Zhoujun Cheng, Haoyu Dong, Zhiruo Wang, Ran Jia, Jiaqi Guo, Yan Gao, Shi Han, Jian-Guang Lou, and Dongmei Zhang. 2022. Hitab: A hierarchical table dataset for question answering and natural language generation. Preprint , arXiv:2108.06712. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, and 181 others. 2025. Deepseek-v3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2412.19437. Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. Preprint , arXiv:2305.14314. Haoyu Dong, Yue Hu, and Yanan Cao. 2025a. Reason-ing and retrieval for complex semi-structured tables via reinforced relational data transformation. In Pro-ceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Con-ference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’25, page 1382–1391, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Haoyu Dong, Yue Hu, Huailiang Peng, and Yanan Cao. 2025b. RelationalCoder: Rethinking complex ta-bles via programmatic relational transformation. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1771–1784, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Haoyu Dong, Jianbo Zhao, Yuzhang Tian, Junyu Xiong, Shiyu Xia, Mengyu Zhou, Yun Lin, José Cambronero, Yeye He, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2025c. Spreadsheetllm: Encoding spreadsheets for large lan-guage models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.09025. Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tat-sunori B. Hashimoto. 2025. Length-controlled al-pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evalua-tors. Preprint , arXiv:2404.04475. Xi Fang, Weijie Xu, Fiona Anting Tan, Jiani Zhang, Ziqing Hu, Yanjun Qi, Scott Nickleach, Diego Socol-insky, Srinivasan Sengamedu, and Christos Faloutsos. 2024. Large language models(llms) on tabular data: Prediction, generation, and understanding – a survey. 

Preprint , arXiv:2402.17944. Xinyi He, Yihao Liu, Mengyu Zhou, Yeye He, Haoyu Dong, Shi Han, Zejian Yuan, and Dongmei Zhang. 2025. Tablelora: Low-rank adaptation on table structure understanding for large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.04396. Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shan-tanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. 2024. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? 

Preprint , arXiv:2404.06654. Yannis Katsis, Saneem Chemmengath, Vishwajeet Ku-mar, Samarth Bharadwaj, Mustafa Canim, Michael Glass, Alfio Gliozzo, Feifei Pan, Jaydeep Sen, Karthik Sankaranarayanan, and Soumen Chakrabarti. 2022. AIT-QA: Question answering dataset over complex tables in the airline industry. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies: Industry Track , pages 305–314, Hybrid: Seattle, Washington + Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rohit Khoja, Devanshu Gupta, Yanjie Fu, Dan Roth, and Vivek Gupta. 2025. Weaver: Interweaving SQL and LLM for table reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 28270–28296, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Buse Sibel Korkmaz and Antonio Del Rio Chanona. 2024. Integrating table representations into large language models for improved scholarly document comprehension. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-shop on Scholarly Document Processing (SDP 2024) ,pages 293–306, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Liyao Li, Chao Ye, Wentao Ye, Yifei Sun, Zhe Jiang, Haobo Wang, Jiaming Tian, Yiming Zhang, Ning-tao Wang, Xing Fu, Gang Chen, and Junbo Zhao. 2025. Table as a modality for large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.00947. Peng Li, Yeye He, Dror Yashar, Weiwei Cui, Song Ge, Haidong Zhang, Danielle Rifinski Fainman, Dong-mei Zhang, and Surajit Chaudhuri. 2023. Table-gpt: Table-tuned gpt for diverse table tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.09263. Qianlong Li, Chen Huang, Shuai Li, Yuanxin Xiang, Deng Xiong, and Wenqiang Lei. 2024. Graphotter: Evolving llm-based graph reasoning for complex ta-ble question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2412.01230. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2023a. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Preprint ,arXiv:2307.03172. Tianyang Liu, Fei Wang, and Muhao Chen. 2023b. Re-thinking tabular data understanding with large lan-guage models. Preprint , arXiv:2312.16702. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023c. G-eval: NLG evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-ment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2511–2522, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Xinyuan Lu, Liangming Pan, Yubo Ma, Preslav Nakov, and Min-Yen Kan. 2025. Tart: An open-source tool-augmented framework for explainable table-based reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2409.11724. Qingyang Mao, Qi Liu, Zhi Li, Mingyue Cheng, Zheng Zhang, and Rui Li. 2025. Potable: Towards sys-tematic thinking via stage-oriented plan-then-execute reasoning on tables. Preprint , arXiv:2412.04272. Md Mahadi Hasan Nahid and Davood Rafiei. 2025. Normtab: Improving symbolic reasoning in llms through tabular data normalization. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.17961. OpenAI. 2025. Openai o3 and o4-mini system card. Technical report, OpenAI. OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Alt-man, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haim-ing Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, and 262 others. 2024. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08774. Pragya Srivastava, Manuj Malik, Vivek Gupta, Tanuja Ganu, and Dan Roth. 2025. Evaluating llms’ math-ematical reasoning in financial document question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2402.11194. Aofeng Su, Aowen Wang, Chao Ye, Chen Zhou, Ga Zhang, Gang Chen, Guangcheng Zhu, Haobo Wang, Haokai Xu, Hao Chen, Haoze Li, Haoxuan Lan, Jiaming Tian, Jing Yuan, Junbo Zhao, Jun-lin Zhou, Kaizhe Shou, Liangyu Zha, Lin Long, and 14 others. 2024. Tablegpt2: A large multi-modal model with tabular data integration. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.02059. Yuan Sui, Mengyu Zhou, Mingjie Zhou, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2024a. Table meets llm: Can large language models understand structured table data? a benchmark and empirical study. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.13062. Yuan Sui, Jiaru Zou, Mengyu Zhou, Xinyi He, Lun Du, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2024b. TAP4LLM: Table provider on sampling, augmenting, and pack-ing semi-structured data for large language model reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10306– 10323, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Zirui Tang, Boyu Niu, Xuanhe Zhou, Boxiu Li, Wei Zhou, Jiannan Wang, Guoliang Li, Xinyi Zhang, and Fan Wu. 2025a. St-raptor: Llm-powered semi-structured table question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.18190. Zirui Tang, Weizheng Wang, Zihang Zhou, Yang Jiao, Bangrui Xu, Boyu Niu, Dayou Zhou, Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, Yeye He, Wei Zhou, Yitong Song, Cheng Tan, Xue Yang, Chunwei Liu, Bin Wang, Conghui He, Xiaoyang Wang, and Fan Wu. 2025b. Llm/agent-as-data-analyst: A survey. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.23988. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2024a. Mul-tilingual e5 text embeddings: A technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2402.05672. Zilong Wang, Hao Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Vincent Perot, Zifeng Wang, Lesly Mi-culicich, Yasuhisa Fujii, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2024b. Chain-of-table: Evolving tables in the reasoning chain for table understanding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2401.04398. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2201.11903. Xiaofeng Wu, Alan Ritter, and Wei Xu. 2025. Tabular data understanding with llms: A survey of recent ad-vances and challenges. Preprint , arXiv:2508.00217. Zhen Yang, Ziwei Du, Minghan Zhang, Wei Du, Jie Chen, Fulan Qian, and Shu Zhao. 2025. Causality meets the table: Debiasing LLMs for faithful tableQA via front-door intervention. In The Thirty-ninth An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Siyue Zhang, Anh Tuan Luu, and Chen Zhao. 2024a. Syntqa: Synergistic table-based question answering via mixture of text-to-sql and e2e tqa. Preprint ,arXiv:2409.16682. Tianshu Zhang, Xiang Yue, Yifei Li, and Huan Sun. 2024b. Tablellama: Towards open large generalist models for tables. Preprint , arXiv:2311.09206. Xuanliang Zhang, Dingzirui Wang, Keyan Xu, Qingfu Zhu, and Wanxiang Che. 2025. Rot: Enhancing table reasoning with iterative row-wise traversals. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.15110. Yunjia Zhang, Jordan Henkel, Avrilia Floratou, Joyce Cahoon, Shaleen Deep, and Jignesh M. Patel. 2023. Reactable: Enhancing react for table question answer-ing. Preprint , arXiv:2310.00815. Zhehao Zhang, Yan Gao, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2024c. 

e5: Zero-shot hierarchical table analysis using aug-mented LLMs via explain, extract, execute, exhibit and extrapolate. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1244–1258, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judg-ing llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. 

Preprint , arXiv:2306.05685. 

A Implementation Details 

All experiments were conducted on Ubuntu 20.04.1 LTS servers equipped with two NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We accessed large-scale open-source and proprietary models via respective APIs. For smaller models, specifically Qwen3-8B, Qwen2.5-7B, InternVL2.5-26B, and Llama-3.1-8B, we de-ployed them locally on the servers. 

A.1 Implementation of Baselines 

All baseline methods were implemented using the official codebases provided by the original authors, adhering to the default hyperparameter settings un-less otherwise noted. Specific adaptations are de-tailed below: (1) EEDP (Srivastava et al., 2025): Due to the absence of official source code, we reproduced the method relying strictly on the prompts documented in the original paper. (2) Foundation Model : We utilize standard tex-tual serialization (e.g., HTML or Markdown) to represent tabular data, evaluating the models’ in-trinsic reasoning capabilities without structural aug-mentation. The detailed prompt templates used for these baselines are provided in Listing 4. 

A.2 Implementation of Our method Algorithm 1 Adaptive Tree Navigation 

Require: Tree Structure T , Question Q

Ensure: Evidence Context C, Answer A 

> 1:

Preprocess T (normalize values)  

> 2:

d ← DETERMINE DIR (T , Q ) 

> 3:

if d = "Root2Leaf" then  

> 4:

(C, A ) ← ROOT 2L EAF (T , Q ) 

> 5:

else  

> 6:

(C, A ) ← LEAF 2R OOT (T , Q ) 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

return (C, A )

AdaSTR. We utilized DeepSeek-V3 for the tree construction phase. To ensure deterministic out-puts, the temperature was set to 0. For the vali-dation loop, we set the acceptance thresholds for Information Coverage and Structural Integrity to 

80% and 70% , respectively, with a maximum of 3

reconstruction attempts. If none of the attempts sat-isfies both thresholds within three trials, we select the candidate from the attempted reconstructions that achieves the highest average score across the two metrics. Upon completion, the constructed trees were cached in JSON format to facilitate effi-cient retrieval in downstream tasks. Specific details regarding the adaptive strategy selection policy are provided in Appendix F. 

DuTR. For the question-answering phase within our proposed framework (Algorithm 1), we em-ployed DeepSeek-V3 with the temperature set to 

0.3. In the textual reasoning stage (detailed in Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 2), Multilingual-E5-Large (Wang et al., 2024a) served as the embed-ding model to support path retrieval and leaf rank-ing. Regarding retrieval hyperparameters, we set 

k2 = 5 for the Root2Leaf strategy, while adopting a larger k1 = 50 for Leaf2Root to ensure compre-hensive coverage of candidate leaf nodes. To determine the final answer from the candi-date outputs (Textual vs. Symbolic), we employed a locally deployed lightweight model, Qwen3-8B ,as the answer selector. This approach is highly ef-ficient, introducing negligible computational over-head; statistical analysis shows an average exe-cution time of only 0.42s for AIT-QA, 0.51s for HiTab, and 0.63s for SSTQA per query. The prompt used for this adaptive selection is as fol-lows:                                                               

> You are arigorous data verification assistant specializing in complex JSON tree-structured table data. Your task is to determine which candidate answer is correct based on the provided table facts.
> ## Table:
> {table}
> ## Question:
> {question}
> ## Candidate Answers: Answer A:{answerA}
> Answer B:{answerB}
> Analysis Steps:
> 1. Locate relevant data within the table. 2. Compare the consistency of both answers against the table data.
> Output Requirements:
> Do not output any explanations, punctuation, or analysis processes. Strictly output ONLY asingle character: "A" or "B".
> The Correct Answer:

We also conduct preliminary explorations on improving the selector; details are provided in Ap-pendix G. 

A.3 Implementation of Evaluation Metrics 

Following recent best practices validating the re-liability of automated evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c), we adopted an LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm to assess answer accuracy, utiliz-ing GPT-5 with a temperature of 0.3.To explicitly validate the reliability of this automated metric, we conducted a manual verification on a subset of 200 queries randomly sampled from the SSTQA dataset . Since our framework generates two can-didate answers per query (derived from Textual 

and Symbolic reasoning modes, respectively), this validation set comprised a total of 400 generated answers. We manually reviewed these instances to establish ground-truth correctness. As shown in our analysis, the automated judge demonstrated an exceptionally high alignment with human decision-making, achieving an agreement rate of 98.25% 

(393 /400 ). Notably, the discrepancies were mini-mal and balanced, comprising only 3 false positives (judged correct but actually incorrect) and 4 false negatives (judged incorrect but actually correct), in-dicating no significant bias in the evaluator. Given this near-perfect consistency, we proceeded with the automated evaluation for the full dataset. The exact prompt used for judgment is:                          

> Judge Prompt:
> Question: {$question} Correct Answer: {$ground_truth} Predicted Answer: {$prediction} Please judge whether the predicted answer is correct. If the answer involves numerical values, slight numerical errors are allowed. Please answer only "Correct" or "Incorrect".

B Baseline Descriptions 

In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of the baseline methods used in our experiments: 

B.1 Prompting and Tool-augmented Methods 

• E5 (Zhang et al., 2024c) is a zero-shot, code-augmented framework specifically designed for hierarchical table analysis. It operates via a five-step pipeline: Explain the table struc-ture, Extract information via code generation, 

Execute the code to ensure accuracy, Exhibit 

the results, and Extrapolate to derive the final answer. It effectively addresses the challenges of complex table structures and implicit se-mantics without requiring fine-tuning. • EEDP (Srivastava et al., 2025) is a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting strategy tailored for reasoning over semi-structured financial docu-ments. It guides the LLM through four logical steps: Elicit domain knowledge, Extract rel-evant evidence (rows/numbers), Decompose 

the problem into atomic calculations, and Pre-dict the final answer. 

B.2 Table-Specific Adapted Models 

• TableLlama (Zhang et al., 2024b) is an open-source LLM fine-tuned on TableInstruct, a large-scale dataset comprising diverse table tasks. It treats tables as serialized text se-quences and utilizes LongLoRA to efficiently handle the long context windows typically re-quired for processing large tables. • TableGPT2 (Su et al., 2024) is a 72B-parameter multimodal model that treats tables as a distinct modality. It integrates a dedi-cated table encoder with the LLM decoder and is pre-trained on massive table-text pairs, allowing it to capture schema-level structural information and perform robust numerical rea-soning. 

B.3 Intermediate-Representation Methods 

• GraphOTTER (Li et al., 2024) addresses complex layouts by converting tables into an undirected graph representation, where cells are nodes connected by spatial edges. It em-ploys an LLM-driven agent to iteratively tra-verse this graph and perform reasoning, effec-tively handling merged cells and headers. • ST-Raptor (Tang et al., 2025a) models semi-structured tables as Hierarchical Orthogonal Trees (HO-Trees) to explicitly capture nesting relationships. It resolves queries by decom-posing them into atomic tree operations (e.g., retrieval, aggregation) which are executed de-terministically against the structured tree rep-resentation. 

C Dataset Details 

We evaluate on three public table QA benchmarks (Table 6). Below we summarize their characteris-tics. 

HiTab (test split). HiTab is an open-domain benchmark focusing on hierarchical tables , where               

> Dataset # Tables # QAs Domain
> HiTab 538 1,584 Open domain AIT-QA 80 367 Airline industry SSTQA 102 764 Open domain
> Table 6: Dataset Statistics. Details of the test sets used in our experiments. SSTQA specifically targets real-world semi-structured tables.

multi-level row/column headers and implicit struc-ture make numerical reasoning and indexing chal-lenging. The tables are collected from real statis-tical reports and Wikipedia, and the QA pairs are constructed by rewriting analyst-authored descrip-tive sentences into questions, which helps preserve real-world analytical intent. The released anno-tations include fine-grained entity/quantity align-ments; each QA instance additionally records its aggregation operator and may provide an explicit answer formula. In our setting, we report results on the HiTab test set (538 tables / 1,584 QA pairs as in Table 6). 

AIT-QA. AIT-QA is a domain-specific bench-mark built from tables in public U.S. SEC filings of major airline companies (fiscal years 2017–2019). Compared with Wikipedia-style flat tables, AIT-QA tables often have more complex layouts, includ-ing hierarchical headers and domain-specific termi-nology. The dataset also provides metadata/anno-tations indicating whether a question requires hi-erarchical header understanding, involves domain terminology, or is a paraphrase. In our experiments we follow the common evaluation subset reported in Table 6 (80 tables / 367 QA pairs). 

SSTQA. SSTQA targets real-world semi-structured tables (e.g., spreadsheet-like layouts) that contain irregular structures such as merged cells, multi-row/column headers, nested regions (subtables), and flexible layouts. It contains 764 questions over 102 curated tables, selected from a larger pool of real-world tables to ensure diverse structures and broad scenario coverage (e.g., administration, finance, HR, schedules, etc.). This benchmark is designed to stress layout-aware reasoning beyond the assumptions of fully structured (relational) tables. Algorithm 2 Leaf-to-Root Reasoning 

Require: Tree Structure T , Question Q

Ensure: Evidence C, Answer A 

> 1:

L ← GET ALL LEAVES (T ) 

> 2:

if using embedding then  

> 3:

L ← EMB SORT (L, Q ) {Rank leaf nodes by relevance}  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

Lrel ← LLM filter (L, Q ) {Filter irrelevant leaves}  

> 6:

k ← 0, K max ← 5 

> 7:

while k ≤ Kmax do  

> 8:

Ck ← ∅  

> 9:

for (pleaf , v ) ∈ L rel do  

> 10:

psub ← pleaf [: |pleaf | − k] {Prune path upward by depth k} 

> 11:

vsub ← GET DATA (T , p sub ) 

> 12:

Ck ← C k ∪ { (psub , v sub )} 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

C ← MERGE (Ck) {Merge overlapping paths}  

> 15:

(ready, A ) ← LLM check (Q, C) 

> 16:

if ready then  

> 17:

return (C, A ) 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

k ← k + 1 {Increase depth to expand con-text}  

> 20:

end while  

> 21:

A ← LLM gen (Q, C) {Fallback generation}  

> 22:

return (C, A )

D Detailed Comparison between ST-Raptor and AdaSTR 

This appendix elucidates the key distinctions be-tween ST-Raptor (Tang et al., 2025a) and our pro-posed AdaSTR framework through a concrete case study. ST-Raptor employs a rule-based, open-loop approach to construct hierarchical trees (HO-Trees) primarily reliant on physical layout heuristics, such as cell merging annotations and positional align-ment. While effective for simple layouts, this method introduces vulnerabilities in complex ta-bles where semantic dependencies may not align with a predefined rule, leading to local bias and error propagation from initial detections. In contrast, AdaSTR reframes table parsing as a closed-loop "Semantic Reconstruction" task, lever-aging LLMs’ global context-awareness to infer la-tent logical subordination directly from content. This results in a more robust semantic tree where 

Algorithm 3 Root-to-Leaf Reasoning 

Require: Tree Structure T , Question Q

Ensure: Evidence C, Answer A 

> 1:

S ← [( root , T , [root ])] {Init Stack}  

> 2:

C ← ∅ {Accumulated Evidence Context}  

> 3:

G ← ∅ {Global Semantic Guidance}  

> 4:

if using embedding then  

> 5:

Ptopk ← EMB RANK (T , Q ) {Retrieve top-

k relevant paths}  

> 6:

G ← EXTRACT ROOTS (Ptopk ) 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

while S̸ = ∅ do  

> 9:

(n, v, p curr ) ← POP (S) 

> 10:

if ISLEAF (n) then  

> 11:

C ← C ∪ { (pcurr , v )} 

> 12:

(ready, A temp ) ← LLM check (Q, C) 

> 13:

if ready then  

> 14:

return (C, A temp ) 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

else  

> 17:

Nchild ← GET CHILDREN (v) 

> 18:

Nsel ← LLM select (n, Nchild , Q, G) 

> 19:

for c ∈ N sel do  

> 20:

PUSH (S, (c, Nchild [c], p curr ∪ { c}))  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end while  

> 24:

A ← LLM gen (C, Q ) 

> 25:

return (C, A )

nodes represent subjects and attributes, edges de-note logical relationships (e.g., subordination, qual-ifications), and leaves hold data values. The adap-tive mechanism in AdaSTR further ensures scala-bility by dynamically selecting construction strate-gies based on table characteristics, with feedback loops for quality assurance. To illustrate, we use a real-world financial table: an "Operating Expenses Analysis" breakdown comparing unit costs year-over-year (2019 vs. 2018), including per ASM changes and percent changes. The table features merged headers (e.g., "Year ended December 31," spanning 2019 and 2018 columns) and irregular alignments, making it representative of complex, semi-structured data in finance domains. 

Table description. The input is an HTML-rendered table (visualized in Figure 6). Key struc-tural elements include: A top-level header "Year ended December 31," merged across two sub-columns (2019 and 2018). Separate columns for "Per ASM Change" and "Percent Change." Rows for categories like "Salaries, wages, and benefits," with values in cents (¢) or plain numbers, and paren-theses indicating decreases. 

ST-Raptor: geometry-driven HO-Tree leads to semantic detachment. Listing 1 shows the output of ST-Raptor. We highlight several con-crete failure modes: (i) Unanchored header node: a placeholder node ( "None" ) is created for {2019, 2018, change} without binding them to the body cells, indicating the header hierarchy is not grounded to the data region. (ii) Positional keys instead of semantic attributes: for most rows, columns are indexed by "0","1","2","3" ,which removes column semantics and prevents de-terministic querying. (iii) Value-as-key corrup-tion: for Depreciation and amortization , numerical values ( 0.78, 0.75, 0.03, 4.0 ) are mis-takenly promoted to keys with empty values, sug-gesting that local alignment cues override global header constraints once header-cell mapping fails. (iv) Schema inconsistency: the Total row uses 

value1..value4 , a schema incompatible with other rows, reflecting the lack of a global consis-tency check. These errors are consistent with ST-Raptor’s open-loop, rule-based construction that assumes physical layout reliably reflects logical hierarchy; once header detection is imperfect, the error cascades irreversibly. 

AdaSTR: semantic reconstruction leads to co-herent structural alignment. Listing 2 shows AdaSTR’s reconstructed semantic tree. AdaSTR represents each row subject ( Category ) as a node, and attaches fully-qualified attributes derived from the header path, e.g., Year ended December 31, - 2019 and Year ended December 31, - 2018 . Crucially, repeated headers are disambiguated by parent context ( Per ASM -change vs. Percent - change ). All cate-gories share a consistent attribute set, making the representation directly consumable by symbolic querying and program synthesis. 

Takeaway. This case illustrates that AdaSTR bet-ter satisfies the four desiderata for complex table serialization: (1) Explicit hierarchy & semantic context via header-path attributes; (2) Represen-tation Alignment by enabling natural-language-like statements such as “(For) Fuel and oil, Year ended December 31 2019 (is) 2.76; ...”; (3) Schema flexibility since attributes are attached per subject node without forcing a rigid relational schema; (4) 

Symbolic compatibility because the tree can be deterministically converted to key-value records or executable queries. 

E Comprehensive Taxonomy of Table Reasoning Methods 

Table question answering (TableQA) in the LLM era can be understood as a pipeline of two de-sign choices: (i) how the table is represented to the model, (ii) how the model reasons over that representation. Following recent TableQA litera-ture (Liu et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024a), we summarize two major paradigms— textual (end-to-end) reasoning and symbolic (program-aided) reasoning —and highlight hybrid variants that combine the strengths of both. 

Notation. We denote a table as T with cells T [r, c ],headers H (flat or multi-level), and a natural lan-guage question q. A TableQA system outputs an answer ˆa and optionally a rationale ˆy or an exe-cutable program ˆp such that ˆa = Exec (ˆ p, T ).

1) Textual reasoning (End-to-End approaches). 

Textual reasoning treats TableQA as conditional generation: 

(ˆ y, ˆa) = LLM  q ∥ Serialize (T ), (2) where Serialize (·) linearizes the table into a token sequence (e.g., Markdown/CSV/TSV, row-wise templates, or hierarchical header strings). The LLM produces a natural-language reasoning trace 

ˆy (optional) and the final answer ˆa directly. In practice, this paradigm is often implemented via direct prompting, chain-of-thought (CoT), self-consistency, or decomposition prompts (Wei et al., 2023; Chen, 2023). Recent work emphasizes that careful table provisioning —selecting relevant rows/columns, augmenting metadata, and pack-ing contexts—can substantially improve end-to-end reasoning accuracy under context limits (Sui et al., 2024b). More recently, Row-of-Thought 

(RoT) prompting structures the generation as it-erative row-wise traversals with intermediate re-flection/refinement, effectively scaling reasoning length while keeping the model grounded in the table and reducing table-content hallucinations in a training-free manner (Zhang et al., 2025). 

Strengths. Textual reasoning is semantically flexi-ble: it can handle vague questions, implicit refer-ences, and multi-hop explanations without requir-ing a fixed operator set. It is also easy to deploy Figure 6: Visualization of the Operating Expenses Analysis table. 

(no executor/tooling) and can be robust to minor schema variations because the model reasons over natural language rather than strict schemas. 

Failure modes. Despite strong semantic under-standing, end-to-end generation may suffer from: • Numerical and arithmetic errors : LLMs may perform approximate calculation or lose track of intermediate values, especially for multi-step aggregation and comparison (Wei et al., 2023; Akhtar et al., 2023). • Faithfulness issues : rationales may not corre-spond to actual table evidence (hallucinated), and answers can be sensitive to serialization order or irrelevant rows (Yang et al., 2025). • Context pressure : Large or wide tables re-quire truncation or retrieval to fit context win-dows (Wang et al., 2024b). However, effective retrieval is inherently difficult over discrete ta-ble units (e.g., isolated cells or triples). • Complex table structure : multi-level head-ers, merged cells, and irregular layouts can be hard to linearize without losing seman-tics (Cheng et al., 2022). 

2) Symbolic reasoning (Program-aided ap-proaches). Symbolic reasoning explicitly pro-duces an executable program (e.g., SQL, pan-das/Python) whose execution yields the final an-swer: 

ˆp = LLM  q ∥ Schema (T )

ˆa = Exec (ˆ p, T ) (3) This paradigm includes classical semantic pars-ing (text-to-SQL) and modern LLM tool-use vari-ants where the model generates code and calls an executor iteratively (Chen et al., 2023). Agentic variants extend this into multi-step tool interac-tion: the model alternates between reasoning, se-lecting an action (Zhang et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2025). PoTable (Mao et al., 2025) further adopts a stage-oriented plan-then-execute pipeline, where the LLM plans and generates Python operations within analyst-inspired stages and iteratively cor-rects errors using real-time execution feedback. Re-cent approaches also evolve intermediate tabular states in the reasoning chain (e.g., Chain-of-Table) so that each step materializes partial results as a new table, reducing long-horizon reasoning bur-den (Wang et al., 2024b). 

Strengths. Symbolic methods typically offer pre-cision by delegating arithmetic and set operations to deterministic executors, while simultaneously ensuring verifiability through auditable program traces that allow for intermediate validation. 

Failure modes. However, symbolic reasoning can be brittle: • Semantic inflexibility : fixed operator li-braries may not capture nuanced question intent, and LLM-generated programs may be logically incorrect or mishandle data; small mismatches in column naming or value formats/units can derail parsing and execu-tion (Cao and Liu, 2025; Nahid and Rafiei, 2025). • Sensitivity to complex tables : irregular lay-Listing 1: ST-Raptor output (Baseline). Note the seman-tic loss in headers ("None") and structural corruption in the "Depreciation" row (lines 28-33).                                                                                                                

> 1{
> 2"table" :{
> 3"None" :{
> 4"2019" :"", "2018" :"", "change" :""
> 5},
> 6"Salaries, wages, and benefits" :{
> 7"0" :"5.27¢", "1" :"4.79¢",
> 8"2" :"0.48¢", "3" :"10.0 %"
> 9},
> 10 "Fuel and oil" :{
> 11 "0" :"2.76", "1" :"2.89",
> 12 "2" :"(0.13)", "3" :"(4.5)"
> 13 },
> 14 "Maintenance materials and repairs" : {
> 15 "0" :"0.78", "1" :"0.69",
> 16 "2" :"0.09", "3" :"13.0"
> 17 },
> 18 "Landing fees and airport rentals" :{
> 19 "0" :"0.87", "1" :"0.83",
> 20 "2" :"0.04", "3" :"4.8"
> 21 },
> 22 "Depreciation and amortization" :{
> 23 // CRITICAL FAILURE HERE
> 24 "0.78" :"", "0.75" :"",
> 25 "0.03" :"", "4.0" :""
> 26 },
> 27 "Other operating expenses" :{
> 28 "0" :"1.92", "1" :"1.79",
> 29 "2" :"0.13", "3" :"7.3"
> 30 },
> 31 "Total" :{
> 32 "value1" :"12.38¢", "value2" :"11.74¢",
> 33 "value3" :"0.64¢", "value4" :"5.5 %"
> 34 }
> 35 }
> 36 }

Listing 2: AdaSTR output (Ours). Note the fully preserved semantic paths and correct value alignment across all rows.                                                                                                                                                                                

> 1{
> 2"tree_table" :{
> 3"Salaries, wages, and benefits" :{
> 4"Year ended... -2019" :"5.27¢",
> 5"Year ended... -2018" :"4.79¢",
> 6"Per ASM -change" :"0.48¢",
> 7"Percent -change" :"10.0 %"
> 8},
> 9"Fuel and oil" :{
> 10 "Year ended... -2019" :"2.76",
> 11 "Year ended... -2018" :"2.89",
> 12 "Per ASM -change" :"(0.13)",
> 13 "Percent -change" :"(4.5)"
> 14 },
> 15 "Maintenance materials..." :{
> 16 "Year ended... -2019" :"0.78",
> 17 "Year ended... -2018" :"0.69",
> 18 "Per ASM -change" :"0.09",
> 19 "Percent -change" :"13.0"
> 20 },
> 21 "Landing fees..." :{
> 22 "Year ended... -2019" :"0.87",
> 23 "Year ended... -2018" :"0.83",
> 24 "Per ASM -change" :"0.04",
> 25 "Percent -change" :"4.8"
> 26 },
> 27 "Depreciation and amortization" :{
> 28 // CORRECT ALIGNMENT
> 29 "Year ended... -2019" :"0.78",
> 30 "Year ended... -2018" :"0.75",
> 31 "Per ASM -change" :"0.03",
> 32 "Percent -change" :"4.0"
> 33 },
> 34 "Other operating expenses" :{
> 35 "Year ended... -2019" :"1.92",
> 36 "Year ended... -2018" :"1.79",
> 37 "Per ASM -change" :"0.13",
> 38 "Percent -change" :"7.3"
> 39 },
> 40 "Total" :{
> 41 "Year ended... -2019" :"12.38¢",
> 42 "Year ended... -2018" :"11.74¢",
> 43 "Per ASM -change" :"0.64¢",
> 44 "Percent -change" :"5.5 %"
> 45 }
> 46 }
> 47 }

outs, hierarchical headers, and implicit rela-tionships can make schema extraction ambigu-ous; symbolic parsers may fail without careful canonicalization (Cao and Liu, 2025). 

3) Hybrid reasoning (Textual ⊕ Symbolic). Hy-brid systems integrate the semantic flexibility of textual reasoning with the precision of symbolic execution, typically employing paradigms such as 

adaptive routing for dynamic selection (Liu et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024a), interleaved modular-ity for step-wise refinement (Khoja et al., 2025) to mitigate hallucinations. However, these method-ologies are predominantly restricted to flat tables with canonical structures; they struggle to gener-alize to complex tables, where irregular schemas and nested headers obstruct the standardized data manipulation required for symbolic engines. In this work, we bridge this gap by introducing AdaSTR ,which serializes complex tables into Semantic Trees. By normalizing irregular layouts into a struc-ture with explicit hierarchy and unified semantics, AdaSTR renders complex data compatible with symbolic execution, thereby successfully extending the novel high-precision hybrid paradigm ( DuTR )to the domain of complex TableQA. 

F Metrics and Mode Selection for Adaptive Tree Synthesis 

F.1 Adaptive Mode Selection Policy 

Directly encoding large tables for LLM process-ing is often infeasible due to context-length con-straints and the sharply increasing computational cost with table size (e.g., even a medium-sized ta-ble can exceed tens of thousands of tokens). We therefore adopt an automatic mode-selection policy that chooses between DSP/SRE/PSS according to a context budget and table statistics. 

Token Budget and Lightweight Statistics. In-stead of utilizing the entire physical context win-dow Lmax , we define an effective reasoning bud-get B to ensure robust attention performance. Let 

Lsafe = α · Lmax be the safe context limit (Liu et al., 2023a; Hsieh et al., 2024), and Lsys be the system prompt cost. The available budget for table serialization is: 

B = Lsafe − Lsys − E (4) where E estimates the reserved tokens for the syn-thesized tree structure. We estimate the table foot-print using a lightweight serialization τ (T ). Specif-ically, τ (T ) transforms the table into a compact nested list format, which eliminates redundant sep-arators to serve as a minimal-token baseline. We compute the following statistics: 

S = Tok( τ (T )) (5) 

¯s = 1

|C|

X

> c∈C

Tok( c) (6) 

rlong = |{ c ∈ C : Tok( c) > γ }| |C| (7) 

n = |rows | · | cols | (8) where S represents the estimated total token con-sumption of the table. To capture content density and scale, we define ¯s as the average token length per cell, and rlong as the long-cell ratio (the propor-tion of cells exceeding a length threshold γ). The variable n serves as the table scale indicator, repre-senting the total number of cells. Here, C denotes the set of non-empty cells, and Tok( ·) is measured using the target model tokenizer. 

Decision Rule. The selection logic prioritizes fit-ting the context first, then addressing verbose (text-dense) overflow, and finally handling massive-scale tables. 1. DSP (Default) : If the estimated token foot-print fits within the context budget, we use direct generation for maximum semantic fi-delity. 

S ≤ B (9) 2. SRE (Density-First) : If the table exceeds the budget but the scale is not massive (cell count is manageable), we attribute the overflow pri-marily to verbose content (e.g., high long-cell ratio) and switch to Symbolic Reference En-coding for compression via address placehold-ers. 

S > B ∧ n ≤ nhigh 

∧ (¯ s > μ ∨ rlong > η ) (10) 3. PSS (Scale-First) : If the table exceeds the budget and the number of cells is massive, we switch to Programmatic Structure Synthe-sis. PSS is most effective for hyperscale ta-bles because loop-based code expands large structures more reliably than token-by-token enumeration. 

S > B ∧ n > n high (11) If S > B but neither SRE nor PSS conditions are strictly met (a rare edge case), we default to SRE as the safer fallback to reduce context length while preserving structure. 

Default Hyperparameters. Unless otherwise stated, we use α = 0 .6, μ = 80 tokens, η = 0 .3,and nhigh = 1 ×10 3. We did not perform extensive hyperparameter tuning; thresholds were chosen once as reasonable defaults. In our ablation studies (Section 4.3), enabling this policy improves evalua-tor scores (IC/SI) and, critically, reduces DSP-only failures caused by output truncation on oversized tables, thereby improving robustness without. 

F.2 Evaluation Metrics for Semantic Tree Quality 

To rigorously assess the quality of the constructed semantic trees and guide the Reflective Switching 

mechanism, we define two quantitative metrics: 

Information Coverage and Structural Integrity .Although we do not provide a theoretical proof, our empirical observations (as illustrated in Figure 7) demonstrate that these metrics serve as reliable proxies for downstream Question Answering (QA) performance. 

1. Information Coverage. This metric measures the completeness of the information transfer from the tabular structure to the tree structure. It is cal-culated as the ratio of original table cells whose content is successfully represented in the generated tree nodes: Coverage = |Cmapped ||Ctotal | (12) where Cmapped denotes the set of cells found in the tree and Ctotal is the total number of non-empty cells in the original table. 

2. Structural Integrity. This metric evaluates the correctness of the hierarchical relationships in the generated tree. We employ a bottom-up path verification strategy. For every data leaf node (value) in the tree, we trace the path back to the 

ROOT . The validity of a path is determined as fol-lows: • Initialization : Start from the Leaf node. Let the Leaf be the distinct anchor. • Traversal : Move upwards to the parent node. • Verification Logic : Check the spatial align-ment in the original table: 1. If the current node is in the same row or same column as the Leaf node, the rela-tionship is valid; continue to the parent. 2. If not, check if the current node is in the 

same row or same column as its imme-diate child node (the node just visited). If yes, the relationship is valid (transitive alignment); continue. 3. If neither condition is met, the path is deemed Structurally Broken , and veri-fication terminates. • Success : If the traversal reaches the ROOT 

without error, the path is valid. The Structural Integrity score is the percentage of valid paths out of all leaf-to-root paths. 

Discussion on Evaluation Metrics. (1) Merged Cell Representation: Many table datasets lack explicit annotations for merged cell spans. For ex-ample, a header row [‘Gender’, ‘’] implies that the second cell inherits the label "Gender," yet the raw data often represents this as a null value. Conse-quently, during structural evaluation, items (e.g., "Male") nested under these implicit headers fail to align with their correct parent nodes, resulting in unwarranted penalties to the structural accuracy score. (2) Information Redundancy & Normal-ization: The AdaSTR method is designed to intel-ligently filter redundant information and normalize headers (e.g., factoring units out of cell values: 10 kg → Key: Weight (kg), Value: 10). While this restructuring offers superior semantic precision, it can trigger false negatives in our information cover-age evaluation scripts, which may fail to recognize the data in its transformed state. 

Correlation with Downstream Accuracy. To validate the proposed metrics, we analyzed their re-lationship with downstream task performance. As illustrated in Figure 7, we conducted correlation ex-periments on the SSTQA dataset. We sampled 200 instances and processed them exclusively using the SRE tree construction strategy. This specific strat-egy was selected to ensure that the metric scores were broadly distributed across the entire spectrum. For the downstream evaluation, we employed our proposed DuTR method to perform the question answering tasks. Our analysis reveals a significant positive correlation between the evaluation metrics and QA accuracy. This trend suggests that higher metric scores correspond to improved QA perfor-mance. Given that downstream accuracy serves as an intuitive proxy for tree quality, these results confirm the effectiveness of our evaluation frame-work. Notably, fluctuations in accuracy observed at higher metric scores are expected, as QA perfor-mance depends not only on tree structure but also on external factors such as question difficulty. Cru-cially, this empirical distribution guides the thresh-old configuration for our Evaluator-Guided Refine-ment Loop. We observe that when the Coverage Rate exceeds 0.8 (the 0.8–1.0 bin), the average QA accuracy remains robust at 84 .00% . Similarly, 

Structure Accuracy demonstrates a consistent per-formance plateau once it surpasses 0.6, with the 0.8–1.0 bin achieving 86 .82% . Based on these find-ings, we set the acceptance thresholds of quality assessment. 

Metric-Guided Self-Correction. We implement a feedback loop that triggers specific refinement actions when the generated tree fails to meet pre-defined quality thresholds. The correction strategy is adaptive to the type of deficiency detected: (1) 

Structural Deficiency: If the Structural Integrity 

score is low, it indicates fundamental flaws in the logical hierarchy (e.g., incorrect parent-child rela-tionships). In this case, we instruct the system to revert to the Hierarchy Identification phase to re-construct the semantic backbone from scratch. (2) 

Information Omission: Conversely, if the struc-ture is valid but Information Coverage is insuffi-cient, it implies that the hierarchy is correct but specific data points are missing. Here, we retain the current tree and prompt the LLM to supple-Figure 7: Relationship between evaluation metric scores (information coverage and structure integrity) and down-stream QA accuracy across score bins. 

ment missing information based on the raw table, while strictly maintaining the backbone hierarchy established in the Hierarchy Identification phase. 

G Optimization Strategies for the Selector Module 

The Selector module plays a critical role in deter-mining the final output when the upstream gen-erators produce conflicting answers. Thus, we conducted an in-depth analysis on a subset of 163 samples where the candidate answers were incon-sistent. We investigate three distinct optimiza-tion strategies: Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), and Logit-based Debiasing (Debias). To ensure deterministic re-producibility, we configured the Qwen3-8B selec-tor with greedy decoding settings (temperature= 0,do_sample=False) and disabled its reasoning mode. Furthermore, for the SFT and Debiasing strategies, we directly utilized the model’s output logits to determine the selected answer. 

Baseline Performance. Our default implementa-tion utilizes a direct Zero-shot Answer extraction prompt shown in Appendix A. On the conflicting subset, the baseline achieves an accuracy of 70.55% (115/163), significantly outperforming random se-lection. The average inference latency is minimal (∼0.5s), making it highly efficient. 

Strategy I: Chain-of-Thought (CoT). We first attempted to enhance the reasoning capability of the Selector by incorporating Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompts. The accuracy improved marginally to 72.39% (118/163), a gain of only 3 correct sam-ples. However, the inclusion of reasoning steps caused a drastic spike in latency, increasing from 0.5s to ∼13s on average. This suggests that for the specific task of binary/multiple choice selection, the computational overhead of CoT yields dimin-ishing returns. The small-scale model may struggle to effectively leverage the generated reasoning path to correct subtle errors. 

Strategy II: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT). To better align the model with the selection task, we constructed a specialized SFT dataset derived from the HiTab training set. Data Construction: We generated 1,000 training samples by pairing the ground truth with a "distractor" answer (a plausible but incorrect answer generated by the LLM). To prevent the model from memorizing answer posi-tions, we applied data augmentation by swapping the order of correct and incorrect answers with a probability of 0.7, resulting in a total of 2,700 sam-ples. Training Setup: We fine-tuned the Qwen3-8B model using QLoRA (4-bit quantization) to ensure efficiency (Dettmers et al., 2023). Key hy-perparameters included a LoRA rank of r = 16 tar-geting all linear layers, a learning rate of 2.0×10 −5

with a cosine scheduler (0.1 warmup ratio), and an effective batch size of 8 trained for 3 epochs using BF16 precision. Result & Analysis: After fine-tuning, the accuracy rose significantly to 76.68% 

(125/163). The substantial improvement indicates that the Selector benefits more from learning the specific error patterns and task format through pa-rameter updates than from zero-shot reasoning. 

Strategy III: Logit-based Debiasing (Debias). 

Recent studies (Zheng et al., 2023) show that LLMs exhibit Positional Bias, often preferring the first op-tion (Option A) in multiple-choice tasks. We imple-mented a parallel decoding strategy to mitigate this without training. Method: We feed the input twice in parallel with the candidate answers swapped (Or-der A, B and Order B, A ). Instead of relying on generated text, we sum the distinct token logits for each candidate across both permutations to deter-mine the winner. Result: This method achieved an accuracy of 73.61% (120/163). While slightly less effective than SFT, this approach requires no train-ing and maintains low latency ( ∼0.6s via parallel batching), serving as a cost-effective alternative. 

Summary. Table 7 summarizes the trade-offs. We conclude that SFT offers the highest perfor-mance ceiling, while the Baseline or Logit-based methods provide the best efficiency. Method Accuracy Latency Training              

> Baseline (Direct) 70.55% ∼0.5s No Strategy I (CoT) 72.39% ∼13.0s No Strategy II (SFT) 76.68% ∼0.5s Yes Strategy III (Debias) 73.61% ∼0.6s No
> Table 7: Performance comparison of optimization strate-gies on the conflicting subset ( N= 163 ).

H Error Analysis 

To understand the limitations of our Dual-Mode Tree Reasoning framework, we conducted a failure analysis on a stratified random sample of N = 60 

error cases drawn from the SSTQA dataset. We sampled equally from three distinct failure popu-lations ( n = 20 each): (1) cases where both Sym-bolic and Textual modes failed, (2) cases where Textual succeeded but Symbolic failed, and (3) cases where Symbolic succeeded but Textual failed. 

H.1 Error Taxonomy and Distribution 

We categorized the errors into four primary types based on the root cause analysis (Table 8). As illustrated in Figure 8, the distribution of error types varies significantly across the failure populations: • Mode-Specific Weaknesses: There is a clear decoupling of errors. Structural Misalignment 

is the dominant failure mode for Symbolic Reasoning (12 cases), confirming that code generators struggle with rigid schema assump-tions. Conversely, Arithmetic Hallucination 

is heavily skewed towards Textual Reasoning (11 cases), highlighting the LLM’s inability to perform precise calculations without external tools. • The Consensus Insight: The Annotation Er-ror category shows a unique pattern: it is over-whelmingly composed of "Both Wrong" cases (12 out of 15). This indicates that when our Textual and Symbolic modules reach a con-sensus that disagrees with the gold label, the discrepancy is usually due to dataset flaws (e.g., wrong ground truth) rather than model error. 

H.2 Analysis of Representative Failures 1. Structural Misalignment (36.7%). While this error affects both paradigms, it is predomi-nantly a Symbolic failure (12 cases vs. 3 Textual). The Symbolic module struggles because code gen-erators often hallucinate a flattened schema for deeply nested trees (e.g., missing a parent key like 

Loan Bank and iterating directly over children). 

Textual reasoning is more robust to structure be-cause it reads the serialized tree linearly, though it occasionally fails (3 cases) when long context win-dows obscure the indentation levels of remote leaf nodes. This contrast highlights that while LLMs un-derstand serialized semantics (Textual) well, map-ping them to rigid executable paths (Symbolic) re-mains fragile without agentic inspection. 

2. Annotation Errors (26.7%). This category represents a mode-agnostic failure, heavily con-centrated in the "Both Wrong" intersection (12 cases). Unexpectedly, a quarter of failures were actually correct model predictions penalized by flawed datasets. For instance, given the query "vari-ance rate" , both models correctly extracted the percentage (-1.4), but the gold label (-2800) re-ferred to the absolute difference. The fact that both 

reasoning modes—despite their orthogonal mech-anisms—arrived at the same answer contradicting the label, suggests that system consensus is often a stronger signal of truth than the noisy ground truth labels. 

3. Arithmetic & Logic Hallucination (20.0%). 

This error manifests in distinct forms across the two modes. For Textual Mode (11 cases), it is a Calcu-lation Failure : the model retrieves correct numbers but drifts during long-chain floating-point aggrega-tion (e.g., 26 .8+ . . . ) due to the lack of a calculator. However, Symbolic Mode is not immune (4 cases); it suffers from Formula Logic Hallucination . Al-though the Python execution is flawless, the model may generate the wrong operator (e.g., sum instead of mean ) or fail to normalize units (e.g., treating "1,000" as a string), leading to numerically wrong answers. Thus, Symbolic reasoning solves calcula-tion but introduces logic derivation risks. 

4. Retrieval Bias (16.7%). This error reflects a "granularity mismatch" where models select high-level summary nodes instead of specific leaves. It is more prevalent in Textual Mode (4 cases) due to “semantic short-circuiting”—the model stops read-ing at the first keyword match (e.g., "Total Expen-diture") ignoring temporal constraints. Symbolic Mode also encounters this (3 cases), but for a dif-ferent reason: Naming Ambiguity . If a parent node and a child node share similar key names, the code Error Type Definition Count %Structural Misalignment The generated code assumes a rigid schema (e.g., spe-cific depth, key-value placement) that does not match the heterogeneous tree structure, leading to execution failures. 22 36.7% 

Annotation Error The model output is factually correct given the table content, but the gold label is incorrect due to annotation errors, typos, or calculation mistakes in the dataset. 16 26.7% 

Arithmetic Hallucination Textual reasoning fails at precise operations: arithmetic aggregation, numerical comparison (especially negative numbers/decimals). 12 20.0% 

Retrieval Bias The model exhibits semantic short-circuiting , select-ing high-level summary nodes (e.g., "Total") that match keywords but lack the required categorical granularity, failing to drill down to specific leaf details. 10 16.7% 

Table 8: Distribution of error types across N = 60 sampled failure cases. 

generator may ambiguously reference the parent object instead of drilling down, failing to satisfy the specific granularity required by the question. 

I Additional Experimental Analysis 

I.1 Comparison with Relational Transformation Methods 

As illustrated in Table 9, to ensure a fair compari-son with RelationalCoder and TabFormer , both of which utilize GPT-3.5 as the reasoning back-bone and report results using Exact Match (EM) 

on the HiTab dataset, we align our experimental setup with these established protocols by employ-ing GPT-3.5 as the downstream QA reasoner . Cru-cially, our primary objective is to investigate which intermediate representation format—our Logical Semantic Tree versus baseline relational or linear formats—more effectively enhances the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. By standardizing the down-stream reasoning engine to GPT-3.5, we isolate the data representation as the key variable. Thus, while we utilize DeepSeek-V3 for the upstream serial-ization (AdaSTR), the performance difference ob-served under the same reasoner directly highlights the superior information accessibility and structural clarity provided by our tree representation. Experimental results demonstrate that our DuTR (Symbolic reasoning) achieves an EM score of 74 .1% on HiTab, significantly outperforming the strongest relational baseline, RelationalCoder (66 .7% ). This performance disparity highlights a fundamental divergence in data representation. Re-lationalCoder and TabFormer attempt to flatten or decompose nested complex tables into standard-ized relational tables—a transformation aligned with SQL logic. However, this process disrupts the            

> Structure Representation Reasoning Method EM (%)
> Baselines
> TabFormer(Dong et al., 2025a) Chain-of-Table(Wang et al., 2024b) 57.4 E5(Zhang et al., 2024c) 56.9 ReactTable(Zhang et al., 2023) 54.3 RelationalCoder(Dong et al., 2025b) Chain-of-Table(Wang et al., 2024b) 66.7
> AdaSTR (Ours)
> DuTR(textual reasoning) 64.1
> DuTR(symbolic reasoning) 74.1
> DuTR(adaptive selection) 68.9
> DuTR(Oracle) 80.4

Table 9: Supplementary comparison with relational transformation methods. We evaluate different structure representations coupled with various reasoning meth-ods. 

original Physical Locality and Hierarchical Con-text . Consequently, the model incurs a higher cog-nitive load during reasoning, as it must implicitly execute complex “Join” operations to reconstruct cross-level relationships. In contrast, our Semantic Tree preserves the topological integrity of the data. Parent and child nodes are directly connected, allowing the LLM to perform aggregation via recursive operations on local substructures without the need for cross-table retrieval. This Structure-Logic Isomorphism is piv-otal to the observed performance gains. On the computation-intensive HiTab dataset, our Symbolic Tree Manipulation yields optimal performance. No-tably, our method maintains a substantial lead even when deployed on the relatively weaker GPT-3.5 backbone. This suggests that the performance gains are derived primarily from superior data structure design rather than solely from the intrinsic capabil-ities of a stronger model. 

Analysis of Adaptive Mode Performance: The slightly lower performance of the Adaptive mode compared to the Symbolic mode can be attributed to the rigidity of the Exact Match (EM) metric. Figure 8: Statistics of error categories by reasoning failure mode. 

EM demands character-level correspondence be-tween the output and the reference answer. Since we did not perform granular optimization to align the textual output with specific EM formatting con-straints, the Adaptive selector occasionally chooses responses that are semantically correct but syntacti-cally mismatched (i.e., failing the EM check). This phenomenon introduces false negatives, thereby pe-nalizing the overall score of the Adaptive strategy. 

I.2 Generalization on Open-Source Models 

As shown in Table 10, the Semantic Tree represen-tation generalizes well across different open-source backbones and inference settings. Compared with directly prompting models with the original raw ta-bles, converting the input into a Tree Table consis-tently improves performance for every model tested (e.g., +3.14 for Qwen2.5-7B, +1.44 for Llama3.1-8B, and up to +9.95 for Qwen3-8B in thinking mode). This suggests that providing an explicitly structured, hierarchy-aware layout reduces surface-form ambiguity and better aligns with models’ in-ternal reasoning patterns. We further observe that 

symbolic-only inputs can be brittle for some open-source models, most notably Llama3.1-8B (10.47), indicating that purely symbolic signals without suf-ficient linguistic grounding may be difficult to in-terpret reliably. Method Qwen2.5-7B Llama3.1-8B Qwen3-8B no thinking thinking Direct Prompt (Raw Table) 46.60 35.99 52.75 54.97 Direct Prompt (Semantic Tree) 49.74 37.43 60.86 64.92                     

> ASTRA (Textual Reasoning) 50.14 40.45 60.60 65.45
> ASTRA (Symbolic Reasoning) 36.39 10.47 58.64 62.70
> ASTRA (Adaptive Selection) 53.01 41.49 65.31 70.02 ASTRA (Oracle) 60.64 44.76 75.26 78.14

Table 10: Performance of Open-Source Models on the SSTQA Dataset. The best results are highlighted in 

bold , and the second-best results are underlined . Note that the “Direct Prompt” method follows the same work-flow as the Foundation model approach used in the main experiments. 

The comparison between Qwen3-8B with and without thinking shows that stronger inference-time reasoning amplifies the benefit of structured rep-resentations: thinking mode improves Tree Table prompting from 60.86 to 64.92 (+4.06), reinforcing that our Semantic Tree guidance remains effective even when the model’s reasoning strategy changes. To further investigate module contributions on smaller parameters, we conducted a detailed ab-lation study on Qwen3-8B (Table 11). A strik-ing contrast with the larger DeepSeek-V3 model emerges in symbolic reasoning: while DeepSeek-V3 showed resilience to removing the Self-Correction Loop (dropping only 1.57% ), Qwen3-8B suffered a severe degradation ( −12 .67% ). This Configuration Acc (%) ∆                       

> Adaptive Tree Navigation 60.60 -w/o Embedding Model 56.68 -3.92 w/o Dynamic Switching --
> Force Root-to-Leaf 55.76 -4.84
> Force Leaf-to-Root 58.64 -1.96
> Symbolic Tree Manipulation 58.64 -w/o Code Examples 50.89 -7.75 w/o Structural Skeleton 53.12 -5.52 w/o Self-Correction Loop 45.97 -12.67
> Impact of Data Representation
> Raw Table (Direct Prompting) 52.75 -
> Semantic Tree (Direct Prompting) 60.86 +8.11
> Table 11: Ablation analysis of DuTR (Qwen3-8B) . We report the Accuracy (%) and the performance change (∆) compared to the full configuration within each mode.

indicates that while frontier models possess robust intrinsic code generation capabilities, smaller mod-els rely critically on iterative execution feedback to rectify syntax or logic errors. Additionally, the 

Static Tree representation alone yielded a +4.45% 

gain over raw tables, confirming that the cogni-tive scaffold provided by our tree structure remains beneficial independent of model scale. Overall, these results demonstrate that the pro-posed representation is not tailored to any single proprietary model, but instead serves as a robust interface for open-source LLMs with varying pa-rameter scales and reasoning capabilities. 

J Case Study 

In Section 4.6, we demonstrated how ASTRA ad-dresses Structural Neglect and Representation Gap 

through a representative case on hierarchical enu-meration ( Explicit Hierarchy ). To provide a com-prehensive evaluation, we present two additional case studies in this appendix, focusing on Repre-sentation Alignment (handling null/missing val-ues) and Symbolic Compatibility (performing long-horizon arithmetic). These cases, summarized in Table 12 and Table 13, further validate the ne-cessity of our Text-Symbolic paradigm. 

J.1 Addressing Linguistic Misalignment in Retrieval 

Queries involving negative constraints or null val-ues (e.g., "empty summary" in Table 12) expose the failure of current serializations to achieve Represen-tation Alignment. Existing methods like GraphOT-TER convert tables into triples or vectors that fail to preserve the natural language context of "miss-ingness," causing the retriever to miss empty cells entirely (Representation Gap). Similarly, EEDP’s linear serialization lacks distinct markers for null values, leading to hallucination during row scan-ning. In contrast, our framework achieves Sym-bolic Compatibility by synthesizing programmatic constraints ( if not record[‘Summary’] ). By shifting from ambiguous linguistic matching to precise symbolic logic, we accurately identify all 26 records, validating the necessity of supporting verifiable code-based reasoning over purely textual serialization. 

J.2 Eliminating Arithmetic Hallucination (Re: Symbolic Compatibility) 

Long-horizon numerical reasoning (Table 13) crit-ically tests Symbolic Compatibility. While base-lines may retrieve the correct data, they fail to sat-isfy the requirement for verifiable computation. As observed with GraphOTTER and EEDP, feeding serialized floating-point numbers directly into an LLM triggers arithmetic hallucination ( 48 , 154 ̸ =51 , 596 ), as the text-based modality is ill-suited for high-precision calculation.Our approach fulfills the symbolic requirement by offloading computa-tion to a Python environment. The generated code naturally handles data type filtering and performs operations with machine precision, demonstrating that an ideal serialization must support the seamless transition from textual representation to executable logic. Question How many expense records have an empty summary? Gold Answer 26 GraphOTTER Output: 4 Evidence: The dense retriever only located 4 isolated empty cells out of 26: 

[(5, 6, ‘’), (13, 6, ‘’), (16, 6, ‘’), (19, 6, ‘’)] 

Failure Analysis: The vector-based retriever struggled to match the query "empty summary" with actual empty strings, resulting in extremely low recall. 

ST-Raptor Output: 46 Process: Decomposed the query and generated the operation chain: [MATH] + [Summary] +[CNT] .

Failure Analysis: While it correctly identified the column and the counting task, the execution module failed to apply the "is empty" filter, effectively counting all 46 rows in the table instead of the specific subset. 

EEDP Output: 29 Process: Attempted a manual row-by-row inspection in the CoT: 

"The following rows have null... 004, 012, 015, 017..." Failure Analysis: The model hallucinated the existence of empty values in non-empty rows during the text generation process, leading to an arithmetic error (counting 29 instead of 26). 

Ours Output: 26 Logic: synthesized a programmatic constraint to filter data accurately: 

if not record['Summary'].strip(): count += 1

Result: The symbolic execution over the structured tree yielded the exact count (26) without hallucina-tion. 

Table 12: Case Study on Null Value Aggregation. Comparison of failure modes: GraphOTTER suffers from 

retrieval miss on empty values (poor Representation Alignment ); ST-Raptor correctly plans but fails in execution (re-turning total count); EEDP suffers from hallucination during manual enumeration. Our method ensures correctness via symbolic code generation. 

Question What is the average standard error of product sales from month 1 to month 18? Gold Answer 3685.4505 GraphOTTER Output: 3439.61 Evidence: The model correctly identified all 14 relevant cells (Months 5–18) and recognized the operation as "Average". 

Failure Analysis: Arithmetic Hallucination . Despite correct retrieval, the LLM failed to sum the sequence of 14 floating-point numbers accurately during text generation, resulting in an incorrect sum (48 , 154 instead of ≈ 51 , 596 ) and final average. 

ST-Raptor Output: 4287.34 Process: Decomposed into [COND] (Month 1-18) -> [MATH] + [AVR] .

Failure Analysis: Execution Error . While the retrieval and plan were semantically correct, the mathematical primitive likely mishandled the ‘None‘ values present in Months 1–4 or failed to compute the weighted mean of the float values correctly. 

EEDP Output: 3399.74 Process: The CoT explicitly listed the 14 values to sum: "3355.12 + 3220.81 + ..." Failure Analysis: Calculation Error . Similar to GraphOTTER, the Chain-of-Thought process suffered from calculation drift. The model calculated the sum as 47 , 596 .35 , significantly deviating from the true sum, leading to an underestimated average. 

Ours Output: 3685.4505 Logic: Generated a symbolic program to iterate and aggregate valid data: 

if error is not None: total += error; count += 1

Result: By offloading the computation to a Python execution environment, our method achieved exact numerical precision, correctly handling null filtering and floating-point arithmetic. 

Table 13: Case Study on Arithmetic Aggregation. Comparison of failure modes on long-sequence numerical queries. Baselines correctly retrieve data but suffer from arithmetic hallucination or primitive execution errors ,proving the inadequacy of textual processing. Our method ensures verifiable precision via code execution, fulfilling 

Symbolic Compatibility .K Prompt 

Listing 1: AdaSTR: Header Normalization 

You are a data analysis expert specializing in parsing complex table structures. Your task is to analyze the first few rows of the provided table and determine aunique normalized header for each column. You must strictly follow these rules: 1. **Strict Preservation of Original Wording**: You must preserve the original text from the table cells. It is forbidden to create new names or summaries. (For example: if a cell contains "Total Students", the header must include "Total Students", not "Total Students Metrics".) 2. **Hierarchical Combination**: If header information is distributed across multiple header rows, combine them using the format: [Lower-Level Header] -[Upper-Level Header]. The part before " - " must be the most specific level. 3. **Strict Column Count Matching**: The number of strings in the output array must exactly match the number of columns in the data rows. The table is provided in JSON array form. [Input Table]: {TABLE_AS_JSON_STRING} Your output must be a single, valid JSON string array representing the normalized headers. Do not provide any explanation. 

Listing 2: AdaSTR: Hierarchy Identification 

You are a data architecture expert specializing in analyzing the logical structure of tables. You will be given a table and its normalized headers. Your task is to identify which columns belong to "Hierarchy Keys" and which belong to "Value Leaves". You must reason about the table step by step and then produce a single JSON object as the final answer. ## Step 1: Inspect column roles For each column, think about: - Is it mostly numeric (measures), mostly text (categories), or mixed? - Roughly how many distinct values does it have compared to the number of rows? - Do the values look like IDs / timestamps / codes (often unique), or like categories (heavily reused)? Use these heuristics: - Columns that are mostly numeric or percentages are usually **value_leaves**. - Columns whose values repeat a lot (far fewer unique values than rows) are strong candidates for **hierarchy_keys**. - A column whose values are almost all unique (ID-like or timestamp-like) is a good **primary hierarchy_key** for simple flat tables. ## Step 2: Detect header-based hierarchies (multi-row headers) If the original table had multiple header rows (already compressed into the normalized headers you see), then: - When a normalized header clearly encodes multiple levels (e.g. "Sales - 2023 -Q1"), its column is usually a **value_leaf** grouped under a higher-level semantic group. - Semantic group names must come directly from the original headers; do not invent new group names. ## Step 3: Detect row-based block structures (very important for complex tables) Even if there is only one obvious text column, the table may still be **complex** if it uses row blocks. Treat the table as **complex** (not simple) when you observe patterns like: 1. **Block headers + detail rows in the same column**: - Some rows in a text column look like high-level categories and have many empty cells or missing numeric values in other columns. - The rows immediately following such a row contain repeated labels such as "total", "weekday", "weekend", etc. with numeric values filled. - The same small set of labels ("total", "weekday", "weekend", ...) appears multiple times in separated blocks. 2. **Strong repetition of small categorical sets**: - A column alternates between "group header" values and a small fixed set of "detail" values in a patterned way. - This usually indicates a hierarchy like: Behaviour Group > Behaviour Detail. In such cases: - You should set "table_type" to "complex", even if there is only one text column. - The **hierarchy_keys** should include that text column. ## Step 4: Decide simple vs complex Use these refined rules: - Classify as **simple** only if ALL of the following hold: 1. There is no obvious multi-row header structure. 2. There is no clear row-based block pattern as described in Step 3. 3. Each row is largely independent. 4. Typically there is at most one main categorical column and the others are mostly numeric measures. - Classify as **complex** if ANY of the following holds: 1. There are multiple categorical columns that naturally form a chain. 2. Some categorical columns have heavily repeated values and clearly act as grouping keys. 3. There are apparent aggregation / subtotal / summary rows. 4. There is a row-based block structure as described in Step 3. ## Output Requirements Your output must be a single, valid JSON object, and must strictly follow the structure below: {"table_type": "simple" or "complex", "analysis_reason": "A brief explanation of the reasoning behind your judgment", "hierarchy_keys": ["header1", "header2", ...], "value_leaves": ["header3", "header4", ...], "semantic_groups": {"OriginalGroupName1": ["header_a", "header_b"] }}Additional constraints: - Every header in "hierarchy_keys" and "value_leaves" must come from the normalized header list. - The union of "hierarchy_keys" and "value_leaves" must exactly cover all normalized headers. - If "table_type" is "simple", "hierarchy_keys" should usually contain only **one** element. [Input Table]: {TABLE_AS_JSON_STRING} [Normalized Headers]: {NORMALIZED_HEADERS_FROM_STEP_1} 

Listing 3: AdaSTR: Tree Construction You are a highly specialized data transformation engine responsible for converting tabular data into a nested JSON tree that preserves all semantic information. You will be given the original table, its normalized headers, and the hierarchy definition. You must construct the final JSON tree based on these inputs, strictly following the rules below. Before constructing the tree, you MUST: - Read the "table_type" and "analysis_reason" from the hierarchy definition. - Decide whether to use a flat structure (for simple tables) or a nested structure (for complex tables). - When the analysis_reason mentions row-based or block hierarchy, you must reconstruct that hierarchy using the row patterns as well as the hierarchy_keys. 1. Semantic Hierarchy Keys - For each hierarchy_key column, the corresponding key in the JSON must follow the format "[Header Name] - [Cell Value]". - You must use " - " (space, hyphen, space) as the separator. - Example: if the header is "Grade" and the cell value is "1", then the JSON key should be "Grade - 1". 2. Strict Preservation of Leaf Node Names - The keys of value_leaves in the final JSON must exactly match the normalized headers. 3. General Structure Generation Rules - Traverse the data row by row, skipping the header row. - For each data row, use the hierarchy_keys (in order) to create or move into the corresponding nested structure. - At the deepest level for a given row, create an object that stores all value_leaves for that row. 4. Handling of Simple Tables (table_type = "simple") For simple tables, you should keep the structure shallow and flat: - Typically there is only one hierarchy_key. - For each data row: - Construct a single key by applying the "[Header Name] - [Cell Value]" rule to that hierarchy_key column. - Store an object under that key with all value_leaves for that row. 5. Handling of Complex Tables (table_type = "complex") For complex tables, you MUST allow multi-level nesting, even if there is only one hierarchy_key column. 5.1 Column-based hierarchies - When there are multiple hierarchy_keys across different columns, you should: - For each row, create or move into a nested path defined by those columns in order (e.g. Region > City > Store). 5.2 Row-based block hierarchies (very important) When the analysis_reason indicates that the hierarchy is primarily row-based or block-structured: - Treat rows whose hierarchy_key cell is non-empty but whose value_leaves are all empty or missing as PARENT or GROUP rows (block headers). - The data rows that follow a parent row are CHILD rows of that parent. - In the JSON tree: - Create a top-level key for each parent row using the hierarchy key rule. - Under that key, create nested keys for each child row. 6. No Data Omission - You must not omit any cell content from the input table. - Every non-header row must contribute at least one object into the JSON tree. 7. Prohibited Behaviors - Do NOT invent new textual labels that do not appear in the original table or headers. - Do NOT rename, summarize, or translate headers or cell values. [Input Table]: {TABLE_AS_JSON_STRING} [Normalized Headers]: {NORMALIZED_HEADERS_FROM_STEP_1} [Hierarchy Definition]: {HIERARCHY_DEFINITION_FROM_STEP_2} Your output must be a single, valid JSON object that fully represents the tree structure of the entire table. Ensure that all data types (numbers, strings) are correctly preserved. Do not output any other text or explanation. 

Listing 4: Prompt Template for Foundation Models 

You are an expert table analyst. Your task is to answer the question based on the provided table. # Instructions: 1. Please enclose your final answer in square brackets, e.g., [Answer]. 2. **Pay strict attention to the required answer type.** - If the question starts with **"Which"** or **"What"** (e.g., "Which item?", "What category?"), your answer must be a *name or description* (e.g., "Sell Product A"), **NOT** the associated numerical value. - If the question starts with **"How much"**, **"What is the value"**, or **"How many"**, the answer must be a *numerical value* (e.g., "120000"). 3. **ONLY when** the answer is numerical (as per rule 2), you must check for any associated "units" (e.g., "ten thousand", "million") and provide the final converted numerical result. ## Table: {table_str} ## Question: {question} ## Final Answer: