Title: Prioritizing the Best: Incentivizing Reliable Multimodal Reasoning by Rewarding Beyond Answer Correctness

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18892v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 00:19:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Prioritizing the Best: Incentivizing Reliable Multimodal Reasoning by Rewarding Beyond Answer Correctness 

Mengzhao Jia, Zhihan Zhang, Meng Jiang 

University of Notre Dame 

mjia2@nd.edu 

Abstract 

Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Re-wards (RLVR) improves multimodal reason-ing by rewarding verifiable final answers. Yet answer-correct trajectories may still rely on in-complete derivations, weak evidence, or state-ments that contradict their conclusions. This gap between answer correctness and reasoning validity, which we call reasoning-answer in-consistency , motivates trajectory supervision in multimodal RL. We compare two main ap-proaches: reward models (RMs), and Genera-tive Rewards (GRs). RMs are efficient and help early in training, but their gains weaken as the policy distribution shifts; GRs improve perfor-mance, but may give unstable rewards and com-putationally expensive. We therefore propose 

Groupwise Ranking Reward , which ranks verifier-passed trajectories for the same prompt in one pass and redistributes reward accord-ingly. Groupwise comparison better separates stronger and weaker correct trajectories with lower judge overhead than GRs. Experiments show that RLVR aggravates reasoning-answer inconsistency, while trajectory supervision alle-viates it. Groupwise Ranking Reward performs best overall, improving reliability-conditioned accuracy from 47.4% to 54.7% over RLVR. 

1 Introduction 

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) are increasingly capable of visually grounded reason-ing (Shi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025c), and Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) has become a standard way to push this progress further by directly optimizing verifiable outcomes such as fi-nal answer correctness (Zhang et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025e; Wei et al., 2025). At the same time, re-cent studies have noted that under outcome-only su-pervision, MLLMs’ reasoning process can become less reliable as training continues, even when the final answer is correct (Chen et al., 2025; Kan et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b; Jia et al., 2025). A closer look at the training process shows that answer-correct responses increasingly rely on incomplete derivations, weak evidence, or even statements that conflict with their own con-clusions. As shown in Figure 1(a): the reasoning trajectory derives X = −11 , but the final boxed answer is 10 , the response would still be rewarded by outcome-only supervision despite an unfaithful reasoning chain. We trace this problem to a basic limitation of outcome-only RLVR: it supervises whether the final answer is correct, but not whether the intermediate reasoning process actually justi-fies that answer. We refer to this failure mode as 

reasoning-answer inconsistency . Left unresolved, this failure mode can make MLLMs unreliable in applications such as medical decision support, au-tonomous driving, and scientific analysis, where a correct-looking answer with contradictory reason-ing is not acceptable. A natural way to address this problem is to add supervision over the validity of the reasoning trajec-tory. However, how to introduce such supervision signals into multimodal RL in a way that is both effective and computationally efficient remains un-derexplored. In this paper, we compare two main families of trajectory supervision methods: Re-ward Models (RMs) and Generative Rewards 

(GRs). RMs directly assign scalar quality scores to the reasoning process. We use the fine-grained Pro-cess Reward Model (PRM) that assigns a score to each intermediate reasoning step (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). On the other hand, GRs use a Large Language Model (LLM) to follow a predefined evaluation instruction, generate a textual judgment then as-sign a scalar score (Zheng et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025d). Our experiments show that RMs are computationally efficient and help in the early stages of training, but their benefits weaken as the policy distribution shifts; GRs im-      

> arXiv:2604.18892v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026 Question : The sum of the numbers in each ring is 55. Which number is X?
> Response :<think>To find X, ...each ring sums to 55. First identify the numbers in the outer ring: 9, 9, 8, 11, ... Sum the
> known numbers: 9+9+8,...=66. Then set up the equation 66+X=55, which gives X=-11. ... Rechecking
> the other ring ... it follows the same idea. Therefore,
> X=-11.</think> \boxed{10}

Policy Model Trajectory Supervision Rewards Process Reward Models (PRMs) trajectory trajectory trajectory trajectory 

> trajectory

Generative Rewards (GRs) trajectory trajectory trajectory 

Groupwise Ranking Reward trajectory  

> Repeat Repeat
> Reasoning Results Final Answer Reasoning-answer Inconsistency! Mismatch
> trajectory
> trajectory
> (b) (a) (c) trajectory trajectory
> trajectory Answer Answer
> Answer

Answer Verifier trajectory 

> trajectory

Figure 1: Reasoning-answer inconsistency under outcome-only RLVR and the motivation for Groupwise Ranking Reward. (a) An example of reasoning-answer inconsistency: the trajectory derives X = −11 in its reasoning, but the final boxed answer is 10 . (b) Training dynamics under outcome-only RLVR and Groupwise Rank-ing Reward. Outcome-only RLVR steadily increases inconsistency and eventually reduces reliability-conditioned accuracy ( RC -Acc ), whereas Groupwise Ranking Reward keeps inconsistency stable and continues improving 

RC -Acc . (c) Comparison of trajectory supervision schemes. PRMs and pointwise GRs score each trajectory independently, while Groupwise Ranking Reward compares verifier-passed trajectories for the same prompt jointly and assigns ranking-based rewards according to their relative quality. 

prove performance to some extent, but their gains are limited by instability and come with severe effi-ciency costs. Based on these observations, we pro-pose a Groupwise Ranking Reward , which ranks verifier-passed trajectories of the same problem in a single pass, and redistributes rewards based on that ranking. Figure 1(c) highlights the key distinction: PRMs and pointwise GRs score each trajectory in-dependently, whereas our method compares multi-ple trajectories jointly and rewards them according to relative quality. By using groupwise comparison instead of independent scoring, the method better distinguishes stronger from weaker correct trajec-tories with lower judge computation overhead than GRs. It achieves the strongest performance among all trajectory supervision methods tested. We conduct extensive experiments with differ-ent judge models, reward designs, and training data to systematically analyze this problem and evaluate the proposed method. The results show that RLVR can aggravate reasoning-answer incon-sistency, whereas trajectory supervision alleviates this effect. Figure 1(b) previews this trend: under outcome-only RLVR, inconsistency rises over train-ing and eventually reduces Reliability-Conditioned Accuracy ( RC -Acc ), while Groupwise Ranking Reward keeps inconsistency stable and continues improving RC -Acc . Among the approaches we study, the Groupwise Ranking Reward achieves both the best accuracy and reasoning faithfulness, improving RC -Acc from 47.4% to 54.7% over RLVR. These gains indicate that even when an-swer correctness is already verified, multimodal RL still lacks a way to prefer better-grounded cor-rect trajectories. 

2 Related Work 

Reinforcement Learning for Multimodal Rea-soning . Chain-of-Thought prompting and RLHF laid the foundation for training LLMs to produce explicit multi-step reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). Building on this trend, re-cent MLLMs extend stepwise reasoning to visually grounded tasks through reasoning-oriented super-vision and post-training, especially in multimodal mathematical reasoning and general-purpose vi-sual reasoning (Shi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025c; Zhang et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025e; Wei et al., 2025). RLVR has become a natural recipe in this setting because verifiable rewards allow di-rect optimization of answer correctness without requiring dense trajectory annotations, and recent pipelines such as GRPO and DeepSeek-R1 show that this paradigm can scale beyond narrow do-mains (Shao et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025). Our work complements these efforts by studying how RLVR should assign dif-ferential credit among verifier-passed rollouts, en-couraging the policy to prefer better-grounded and more reliable reasoning trajectories. 

Reasoning-Answer Inconsistency in MLLMs .Recent multimodal RL work identifies reasoning-answer inconsistency as a common side effect of outcome-only RLVR, where answer accuracy can improve even as answer-reasoning coherence degrades. Existing fixes mainly follow three di-rections. One uses reference-policy calibration (Chen et al., 2025; Kan et al., 2025), but this signal becomes less reliable as the online pol-icy drifts. Another enforces consistency under semantics-preserving perturbations (Huang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b), though these methods are most natural for closed-answer settings. A third line uses rubric-based generative rewards (Jia et al., 2025), which provide richer supervision but intro-duce substantial judge overhead without being up-dated jointly with the evolving policy. 

Trajectory Supervision . A parallel line of work improves reasoning by supervising intermediate steps rather than only final answers. Trajectory supervision was first studied in text-only mathe-matical reasoning (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023) and has recently been extended to mul-timodal settings (Zhang et al., 2025a). Another line of work uses language models themselves as evaluators or reward models (Zheng et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024). Recent work fur-ther shows that listwise or distribution-aware judge inference can be more reliable than independently assigning a single absolute score to each candidate (Zhao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025d). Closely related, RLRR replaces absolute reward shaping with relative ranking in group-based RL and trains a ranking reward model to produce groupwise pref-erences (Niu et al., 2026). However, that work mainly uses ranking to improve reward modeling and optimization. Our method aligns with these directions: we study the effects of both RMs and GRs for trajectory supervision in multimodal RL. Moreover, we propose groupwise ranking methods aimed at improving the reliability of multimodal reasoning. 

3 Method 

RLVR improves answer correctness, but it does not distinguish among verifier-passed trajectories whose reasoning quality differs substantially. As a result, the policy model can still be rewarded for correct answers supported by incomplete or con-tradictory traces. To address this limitation, we study three trajectory supervision reward designs within the same RLVR pipeline. The first is a Re-ward Model (RM), which assigns scalar scores; in our experiments, this RM is instantiated as a fine-grained Process Reward Model (PRM) that scores intermediate reasoning steps (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025a). The second is a standard 

Generative Reward (GR), which uses an LLM-as-a-Judge to produce a textual judgment and score each trajectory independently (Zheng et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024). The third is our 

Groupwise Ranking Reward , a groupwise variant of generative reward that compares verifier-passed trajectories for the same prompt and redistributes reward according to their relative quality ranking (Zhao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025d). 

3.1 Problem Setup 

Let D be a multimodal training set. Each training example is denoted by (x, a ∗), where x = ( v, q ),

v is the input image, q is the textual question, and 

a∗ is the ground-truth answer. Given x, the policy 

πθ(· | x) generates a structured response 

y = [ z, a ], (1) where z is the reasoning trajectory enclosed in 

<think>...</think> and a is the final answer ex-tracted from the \boxed{...} expression. In the RLVR pipeline, each sampled complete response 

y = [ z, a ] is referred to as a rollout .Following standard RLVR pipelines for reason-ing (Shao et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), a rule-based verifier provides a deterministic verifi-cation reward 

rver (y) = I[Verify( a, a ∗) = 1] , (2) where I[·] is the indicator function. RLVR max-imizes E(x,a ∗)∼D ,y ∼πθ [rver (y)] . This objective gives identical reward to all verifier-passed re-sponses; however, their reasoning quality may differ substantially. We use the standard GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) optimization pipeline through-out: for each prompt x, we sample a rollout group 

Y = {yi = [ zi, a i]}Ni=1 from πθ(· | x) and opti-mize over this group using verifier and trajectory rewards. Here we focus on how different methods define the trajectory supervision signal; the GRPO optimization objective and equations are given in Appendix A. 

3.2 Trajectory Reward Variants 

Beyond the verifier reward rver (yi), we add an aux-iliary trajectory reward raux ,i to provide extra super-vision on rollout yi = [ zi, a i]. Common trajectory rewards include RMs and GRs. 

RMs. RMs assign scalar quality scores without generating extra natural language justifications. They can operate at different supervision granulari-ties. In this paper, we instantiate the RM as a fine-grained PRM that decomposes the reasoning trajec-tory into intermediate steps and assigns a step-level quality signal along the trajectory. Let Sprm denote the reward model and let {sprm  

> i,t

}Ti 

> t=1

= Sprm (x, z i)

be the scores for the Ti reasoning steps in rollout 

i. The rollout-level PRM reward is obtained by aggregating these step scores, 

rprm ,i = Agg 



{sprm  

> i,t

}Ti

> t=1



, (3) where Agg( ·) denotes the aggregation rule. PRM provides dense supervision over the reasoning pro-cess. 

GRs. GRs use an LLM judge that follows an eval-uation instruction with explicit scoring rubrics. For each rollout, the judge generates a textual judgment together with a rubric-grounded scalar score, from which the reward is parsed: 

rgr ,i = ParseScore  Sgr (q, z i, a i) . (4) Compared with RMs, GRs do not directly emit scores; instead, the judge first produces an evalu-ative judgment, and the scalar reward is then ex-tracted from that judgment. In our setup, the rubric casts the judge as an expert evaluator of reasoning quality, defines anchored score levels in [0 , 1] , and asks it to assess dimensions such as logical coher-ence, calculation quality, completeness of the con-clusion, and honest handling of uncertainty. The judge returns a short feedback string together with a JSON-formatted scalar score, which we parse as the reward. We refer to the setting where each rollout is judged independently as pointwise GR ,to distinguish it from the groupwise GR setting introduced next. RMs and GRs are both widely used trajectory supervision signals, but they also have limitations: PRM can weaken under policy shift, while point-wise GR depends on the absolute score calibration and requires separate judging for each rollout. Mo-tivated by this, we further introduce Groupwise Ranking Reward as a groupwise variant of GRs. 

Groupwise Ranking Reward. Groupwise Rank-ing Reward extends GRs from independent scoring to within-group ranking. For each prompt x, we keep only the verifier-passed subset I+ = {i :

rver (yi) = 1 } within the sampled rollout group Y ,where |I+| denotes the number of verifier-passed rollouts, because incorrect rollouts are already han-dled by the verifier. We focus on finding which correct rollout is best in reliability and quality. The groupwise judge Scmp takes the shared ques-tion q together with all verifier-passed reasoning-answer pairs {(zi, a i)}i∈I+ , compares them side-by-side, and outputs M ordered tie-aware tiers 

(τ1, τ 2, . . . , τ M ) = Scmp (q, {(zi, a i)}i∈I+ ) , (5) where τ1 ≻ τ2 ≻ · · · ≻ τM , τm contains the candidates assigned to the m-th rank tier, and τ1 is the top tier. We design a rank-to-score conversion based on a simple intuition: a rollout should receive a higher score if it is ranked ahead of more verifier-passed rollouts, and a lower score if it is ranked ahead of fewer. We also preserve ties instead of forc-ing arbitrary tie-breaking, avoiding injecting arti-ficial noise when the judge views several traces as equally rigorous. Concretely, for any rollout 

i ∈ τm, let bi = PMℓ=m+1 |τℓ| be the number of lower-ranked correct rollouts and let ci = |τm| − 1

be the number of tied rollouts. The raw score is 

˜si = bi + 12 ci

|I+| − 1 , (6) where each lower-ranked rollout contributes one point, each tie contributes half a point, and the result is normalized by the number of available comparisons. Thus, candidates in τ1 receive the highest raw score and candidates in τM the low-est, while prompts with different |I+| remain on the same [0 , 1] scale. This normalization makes the rank-to-score mapping well-defined for prompt groups with any number of verifier-passed rollouts. The final ranking reward is obtained by centering these raw scores within the verifier-passed set. Let 

¯s = 1

> |I+|

P 

> j∈I+

˜sj denote the mean raw score over 

I+.

rrank ,i =

(

˜si − ¯s, if i ∈ I+, |I+| ≥ 2,

0, otherwise . (7) This centering makes the ranking reward zero-mean within the verifier-passed set. Under this mapping, 

rrank ,i is bounded in [−0.5, 0.5] . Thus, the judge acts as a pure redistribution mechanism: better-supported correct rollouts receive positive ranking reward, while weaker correct rollouts can still have positive verifier reward but negative ranking re-ward, which effectively penalizes weaker correct reasoning among answer-correct rollouts. Incorrect rollouts remain untouched and still receive zero to-tal reward. If all verifier-passed rollouts fall into the same tier, the centered reward is again zero. Ap-pendix B gives the full implementation details and summarizes alternative rank-to-score mappings. 

3.3 Training Objective 

The final rollout reward combines verification with one auxiliary trajectory reward: 

Ri = rver (yi) + λr aux ,i , (8) where λ ≥ 0 controls the strength of trajectory supervision and raux ,i ∈ { rprm ,i , r gr ,i , r rank ,i }. In our experiments, we use λ = 1 for all three variants. The optimization algorithm is unchanged. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Training Hyperparameters. All RL training runs start from the save base checkpoint, Qwen2. 5-VL-7B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025). Across all RL variants, we use rollout budget n = 8 , auxiliary-reward coefficient λ = 1 , learning rate 1 × 10 −6,KL coefficient 1 × 10 −2. All experiments use the same ViRL (Wang et al., 2025a) training data and are run for 2 epochs. 

Methods to Compare. Our main experiment com-pares four RL variants on ViRL : outcome-only RLVR, w/ PRM, w/ Pointwise GR, and w/ Group-wise Ranking Reward. All four use the same GRPO optimization pipeline and differ only in how trajectory supervision is added. The PRM variant uses a visual process-reward model, Qwen-VL-PRM-7B (Ong et al., 2025), that scores each trajectory step with a binary true/false decision and averages rewards across all steps. The two GR-based variants both use gpt-oss-20b (Ope-nAI, 2025) as the judge over textualized question-trajectory-answer tuples: w/ Pointwise GR gives a scalar judge_score in [0 , 1] , while w/ Group-wise Ranking Reward assigns tie-aware ranks for verifier-passed candidates and maps them to cen-tered groupwise rewards. Appendix B.1 lists the judge prompts. 

Benchmarks. We evaluate final checkpoints on five multimodal reasoning benchmarks: three math-focused benchmarks, MathVision (Wang et al., 2024), MathVista (Lu et al., 2024), and WeMath (Qiao et al., 2025), and two broader general-reasoning benchmarks, MMMU (Yue et al., 2024a) and MMMU-Pro (Yue et al., 2024b). To make the reported average reasoning–answer inconsistency across all benchmarks fair, we randomly sample 500 instances from each dataset to construct our final test set. In this way, each benchmark con-tributes equally to the overall average; otherwise, we find the value could be artificially inflated. 

Evaluation Metrics. The standard answer Ac-curacy ( Acc ) checks only whether the final an-swer matches the ground truth. In our setting, this is not sufficient because we frequently ob-serve reasoning-answer inconsistency : the final answer is correct, but the trajectory supports a dif-ferent conclusion or does not justify the boxed an-swer. Such predictions are hard to trust even when they count as correct under the standard Accuracy metric. To measure this failure mode, we ask a 

judge model to read the whole trajectory, includ-ing the final answer, and generate a binary con-sistency score. We then report the overall incon-sistency rate ( IncR ), the correct-but-inconsistent rate ( CBIR , the final answer is correct but the tra-jectory fails to pass the inconsistency judgment), and Reliability-Conditioned Accuracy ( RC -Acc )which is defined as RC -Acc = Acc − CBIR .That is to say, RC -Acc removes answer-correct but reasoning-inconsistent cases, making a stricter cri-teria, thus we use it as the primary metric through-Table 1: Model performance comparison results under a matched training budget. The second and third columns report five-benchmark average RC -Acc and Acc , respectively, while the remaining benchmark columns report                                               

> RC -Acc . Groupwise Ranking Reward achieves the best overall performance, yielding the highest average RC -Acc
> and leading on four of the five benchmarks. We bold the best value in each numeric column and underline the second best.
> Method RC-Acc Avg. Acc Avg. MathVision MathVista MMMU MMMU-Pro WeMath
> Reference checkpoints
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B-IT 47.3 49.0 24.8 67.2 52.6 35.2 56.6 RLVR 47.4 53.6 22.8 70.8 48.2 36.2 58.8
> Controlled comparison with different reward methods w/ PRM 46.8 49.1 26.4 66.4 50.0 30.6 60.8
> w/ Pointwise GR 52.3 53.8 31.0 71.0 56.6 39.0 63.8
> w/ Groupwise Ranking Reward 54.7 55.9 31.4 74.8 57.8 38.8 70.8

out the paper. 

Reasoning-Answer Inconsistency Judge. When judging whether a trajectory is inconsistent, we de-compose the task into four simple steps: (i) extract the conclusion implied by the trajectory, (ii) extract and normalize the final boxed answer, including mapping option letters to option content when the prompt provides it, (iii) compare the two under lightweight equivalence rules such as unit omission and numeric reformatting, and (iv) abstain with N/A when the model did not properly provide a valid answer (abstentions do not count toward in-consistency rate). This decomposition makes the intermediate decision points explicit and easier to audit. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the five-benchmark average 

RC -Acc and Acc , together with the benchmark-wise RC -Acc , after training with different methods for 2 epochs. Appendix Table 2 provides the com-plete scores, including Acc , RC -Acc , and CBIR .

RLVR improves answer accuracy but not rea-soning reliability. Compared to the base check-point, RLVR raises average answer accuracy, but its 

RC -Acc remains unchanged because correct-but-inconsistent predictions become much more fre-quent (see Table 2 for CBIR scores). This reveals a significant side effect of outcome-only RL: the pol-icy gets the final answer right more often, but the re-ward still cannot tell whether the trajectory actually supports that answer. GR-based rewards recover this gap, and Groupwise Ranking Reward gives the best overall trade-off. Under the same train-ing budget, both GR-based variants outperform RLVR and the PRM variant, and Groupwise Rank-ing Reward reaches the strongest average RC -Acc 

at 54 .7% , compared with 52 .3% for Pointwise GR and 47 .4% for RLVR. This suggests that comparing correct candidates within the same prompt gives a more reliable signal than scoring each rollout in isolation. The gains are broad rather than benchmark-specific. Groupwise Ranking Reward performs best on four of the five benchmarks and remains competitive on MMMU-Pro, with espe-cially large gains on WeMath. The improvement is therefore not tied to one dataset or one answer format. 

4.3 Analysis 4.3.1 Training Dynamics 

Figure 2 shows the five-benchmark average trends for Acc , RC -Acc , IncR , and CBIR , so we can see how accuracy and inconsistency evolve throughout training rather than only at the final checkpoint. 

Outcome-only reward harms reasoning reli-ability as training progresses. Although RLVR improves standard answer accuracy from 51% to 

54% , as shown in the first panel of Figure 2, this gain does not translate into more reliable or faithful reasoning trajectories. Its RC -Acc peaks early at around 51 .20% between 20 and 30 training steps, but then declines to 47 .36% by step 140. This de-terioration is driven by a substantial increase in reasoning-answer inconsistency during the later stages of training: IncR rises from 6% at step 60 to 19% at step 140, while CBIR increases steadily from 2% to 6% over the full training process. These results suggest that while outcome-only RL can im-prove final-answer correctness, it simultaneously degrades reasoning reliability in multimodal rea-soning tasks. 20 40 60 80 100 120 140                      

> Training Steps
> 50
> 52
> 54
> 56
> Accuracy
> 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
> Training Steps
> 47.5
> 50.0
> 52.5
> 55.0
> RC-Acc
> 10
> 15
> 20
> IncR
> 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
> Training Steps
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 3.0
> 4.5
> 6.0
> CBIR
> 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
> Training Steps
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> RLVR w/ PRM w/ Pointwise GR w/ Groupwise Ranking Reward

Figure 2: Training dynamics across reward variants. The four panels report Accuracy, RC-Acc, IncR, and CBIR, and all reported values are percentages. The last two panels use a broken y-axis so the large RLVR values remain visible while differences among the lower-valued methods are still readable. Although outcome-only RL can improve final-answer correctness, it simultaneously degrades reasoning reliability in multimodal reasoning tasks. By contrast, Groupwise Ranking Reward is the only method that consistently improves both answer accuracy and RC -Acc while simultaneously reducing IncR and CBIR .

PRM offers only limited benefits for reducing reasoning-answer inconsistency. Although PRM has been reported to be effective for some text-only reasoning tasks, incorporating a PRM reward does not yield a substantial improvement in RC -Acc 

under our multimodal reasoning setup. Instead, its trend resembles that of vanilla RLVR: RC -Acc 

plateaus during the middle stage of training and then declines afterward. PRM-based training is able to prevent inconsistency rates from growing markedly, but it does not reduce them in a mean-ingful way either. This finding suggests that PRMs remain constrained by their generalization ability, which is a common criticism of such approaches, because the policy model can generate responses that differ substantially from the PRM’s training distribution. 

Our group-wise ranking reward is the most effective at reducing inconsistent reasoning tra-jectories. It is the only method that delivers stable and continuous improvement across all four panels: it consistently improves both answer accuracy and 

RC -Acc , while simultaneously reducing IncR and 

CBIR . These results indicate that our method pro-vides more stable and reliable reward signals. More importantly, they offer clear evidence that our gen-erative reward alters the direction of optimization, rather than merely stacking training compute. 

4.3.2 Effect of Model Size on Inconsistency 

We next ask whether the significance of the reason-ing–answer inconsistency problem is related to the size of the model. Figure 3 compares Qwen2.5-VL 3B and 7B checkpoints under the same ViRL training setup. We find that scaling mitigates the 3B 7B 3B 7B  

> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 40.6
> 49.1 47.3
> 53.5
> Before
> training
> After
> training

Accuracy     

> 3B 7B 3B 7B
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 2.6 1.9
> 7.3
> 3.7
> Before
> training
> After
> training

Inconsistency 

Figure 3: Qwen2.5-VL-3B and 7B models trained with vanilla RLVR: Accuracy (left) and Inconsistency (right). Here, Inconsistency denotes the correct-but-inconsistent rate ( CBIR ). In each panel, the first two bars show the initial checkpoint and the last two bars show the final checkpoint. All values are percentages. 

model’s inconsistency, but it does not remove the incentive that creates it. The 7B model starts from a lower correct-but-inconsistent rate than the 3B model, but both models still drift upward under outcome-only RL. The result suggests that model capacity changes the severity of the failure mode, whereas the underlying cause remains the reward signal. 

4.3.3 Effect of the Rank-to-Score Mapping Function 

After the judge produces an ordering over verifier-passed responses, we still need a scalar mapping from that ordering to rollout reward. We compare four simple options. Pairwise-Comparison Score (PCS) , our default mapping, converts the same K-candidate ranking into a tie-aware pairwise win rate: each candidate gets 1 point against every lower-ranked verifier-passed candidate, 0.5 against RC-Acc IncR       

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> RC-Acc (%)
> 54.72 53.80 53.72 53.24
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> IncR (%)
> 3.04
> 2.28
> 2.88
> 2.52
> PCS EDN TRS IRN

Figure 4: Ablation on the rank-to-score mapping func-tion under the matched training setup. The left group reports RC -Acc with the left y-axis, and the right group reports IncR with the right y-axis. Bars are ordered as PCS (default), EDN, TRS, and IRN. 

every tied candidate, and 0 against every higher-ranked candidate, then normalizes by K − 1. The three alternatives are Exponential-Decay Normal-ization (EDN) , which uses an exponentially decay-ing rank score before normalization; Tiered-Rank Score (TRS) , which maps each final rank tier di-rectly to evenly spaced linear rewards; and Inverse-Rank Normalization (IRN) , which assigns each candidate a reciprocal score 1/r and then min-max normalizes it within the prompt. Figure 4 com-pares these four mappings using the two most rele-vant summary metrics for this design choice: five-benchmark average RC -Acc and IncR .As the figure suggests, the main gain comes from group-wise comparison itself, not from a fragile post-ranking mapping. Across the four mappings, average RC -Acc varies only from 

53 .24% to 54 .72% , a spread of 1.48 points. PCS performs the best, but the performance differences among the four variants are still minor. This shows that once the judge can reliably compare correct candidates within a prompt, the exact monotonic rank-to-rewards mapping matters much less. 

4.3.4 Stability Comparison Between Pointwise GRs and Groupwise Ranking 

Groupwise Ranking Reward is motivated by the fact that all rollouts for the same prompt are judged together in a single pass under a shared comparison standard. In contrast, pointwise GR scores each response independently, so judging N rollouts re-quires N separate judge calls, and the judge may apply slightly different internal standards across those calls. Therefore, we assume that Groupwise Ranking Reward has a stability advantage over pointwise GR. We evaluate this stability through a controlled simulation: if a judge is stable, repeated calls on the same fixed responses should produce similar rewards. Specifically, we randomly sample 500 prompts, generate 8 rollouts for each prompt as in the train-ing setting, and rerun the reward assignment pro-cess 4 times at a relatively low temperature ( 0.7). In each repeat, we construct rewards exactly as in training: pointwise GR scores each response inde-pendently, whereas Groupwise Ranking Reward jointly ranks the verifier-passed responses within the same prompt and maps that ranking to scalar rewards. We then compute the variance of the re-peated reward values and average this quantity over the full sampled set. This metric measures how much the assigned reward changes under small per-turbations; lower values therefore indicate more stable reward assignment. We find that groupwise ranking yields substantially lower reward vari-ance. The mean variance drops from 0.026 under pointwise GR to 0.016 under Groupwise Ranking Reward, a 37 .6% reduction. This suggests that rel-ative comparison makes the assigned reward less sensitive to judge randomness and provides a more stable supervision signal. 

5 Conclusion 

We study reasoning-answer inconsistency in mul-timodal RLVR and show that outcome-only opti-mization can increase this mismatch even when answer accuracy improves. We compare trajectory supervision methods and find that they mitigate this effect. More broadly, these results suggest that an-swer correctness alone is an incomplete objective for multimodal reasoning, and that trajectory-level supervision remains valuable even after verifiable rewards already improve end accuracy. Among them, Groupwise Ranking Reward performs best by jointly ranking verifier-passed trajectories for the same prompt. It achieves the strongest balance between accuracy and faithfulness, improving aver-age accuracy from 53.6% to 55.9% and reliability-conditioned accuracy from 47.4% to 54.7% over RLVR, while requiring less judge computation than pointwise generative rewards. We also find that groupwise ranking is more stable than pointwise GR, suggesting that shared within-prompt compar-ison provides a cleaner optimization signal. Limitations 

Our study focuses on a specific phenomenon that becomes visible in answer-verifiable RLVR set-tings: the model can receive reward for a correct final answer even when the reasoning trajectory does not actually support it. This framing fits do-mains where correctness can be checked reliably, but it does not directly cover less verifiable gener-ation settings without a single canonical answer, such as creative writing, free-form visual dialogue, subjective caption revision, or brainstorming tasks. In such settings, the same failure mode may not appear in the same explicit form, and both incon-sistency measurement and reward design may need to be reformulated. Extending the analysis to these less verifiable multimodal tasks is an important direction for future work. 

References 

Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shi-jie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, and 8 others. 2025. Qwen2.5-VL technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 .Yi Chen, Yuying Ge, Rui Wang, Yixiao Ge, Junhao Cheng, Ying Shan, and Xihui Liu. 2025. Grpo-care: Consistency-aware reinforcement learning for multi-modal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16141 .Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 .DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capa-bility in LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun Zhang, and 1 others. 2024. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 .Minbin Huang, Runhui Huang, Chuanyang Zheng, Jingyao Li, Guoxuan Chen, Han Shi, and Hong Cheng. 2025. Answer-consistent chain-of-thought re-inforcement learning for multi-modal large langauge models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10104 .Mengzhao Jia, Zhihan Zhang, Ignacio Cases, Zheyuan Liu, Meng Jiang, and Peng Qi. 2025. Autorubric-r1v: Rubric-based generative rewards for faithful multi-modal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14738 .Zhehan Kan, Yanlin Liu, Kun Yin, Xinghua Jiang, Xin Li, Haoyu Cao, Yinsong Liu, Deqiang Jiang, Xing Sun, Qingmin Liao, and Wenming Yang. 2025. Taco: Think-answer consistency for optimized long-chain reasoning and efficient data learning via re-inforcement learning in lvlms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20777 .Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 .Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. MathVista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Wenzhe Niu, Wei He, Zongxia Xie, Jinpeng Ou, Huichuan Fan, Yuchen Ge, Yanru Sun, Ziyin Wang, Yizhao Sun, Chengshun Shi, Jiuchong Gao, Jinghua Hao, and Renqing He. 2026. From ab-solute to relative: Rethinking reward shaping in group-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.23058 .Brandon Ong, Tej Deep Pala, Vernon Toh, William Chandra Tjhi, and Soujanya Poria. 2025. Training vision-language process reward models for test-time scaling in multimodal reasoning: Key insights and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23250 .OpenAI. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. OpenAI model card. Accessed 2026-03-13. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155 .Runqi Qiao, Qiuna Tan, Guanting Dong, Minhui Wu, Chong Sun, Xiaoshuai Song, Jiapeng Wang, Zhuoma GongQue, Shanglin Lei, Yifan Zhang, Zhe Wei, Miaoxuan Zhang, Runfeng Qiao, Xiao Zong, Yida Xu, Peiqing Yang, Zhimin Bao, Muxi Diao, Chen Li, and Honggang Zhang. 2025. We-Math: Does your large multimodal model achieve human-like mathematical reasoning? In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 20023– 20070. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Wenhao Shi, Zhiqiang Hu, Yi Bin, Junhua Liu, Yang Yang, See-Kiong Ng, Lidong Bing, and Roy Ka-Wei Lee. 2024. Math-LLaVA: Bootstrapping mathemati-cal reasoning for multimodal large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4663–4680. Yi Su, Dian Yu, Linfeng Song, Juntao Li, Haitao Mi, Zhaopeng Tu, Min Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2025. Crossing the reward bridge: Expanding rl with verifi-able rewards across diverse domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23829 .Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Fran-cis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. 2022. Solving math word problems with process- and outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275 .Haozhe Wang, Chao Qu, Zuming Huang, Wei Chu, Fangzhen Lin, and Wenhu Chen. 2025a. VL-Rethinker: Incentivizing self-reflection of vision-language models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08837 .Jiahao Wang, Weiye Xu, Aijun Yang, Wengang Zhou, Lewei Lu, Houqiang Li, Xiaohua Wang, and Jinguo Zhu. 2025b. Enhancing the outcome reward-based rl training of mllms with self-consistency sampling. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10648 .Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Weikang Shi, Zimu Lu, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. 2024. Measuring multi-modal mathematical reasoning with MATH-Vision dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14804 .Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Linda Wei, Aojun Zhou, Weikang Shi, Zimu Lu, Han Xiao, Yunqiao Yang, Houxing Ren, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. 2025c. Mathcoder-VL: Bridging vision and code for enhanced multimodal mathematical reasoning. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2025 , pages 2505–2534. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao, R. X. Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Y. Wu, and Zhifang Sui. 2023. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce llms step-by-step without human annotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08935 .Victor Wang, Michael JQ Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. 2025d. Improving LLM-as-a-judge inference with the judgment distribution. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 ,pages 23173–23199, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, Zhaokai Wang, Zhe Chen, Hongjie Zhang, Ganlin Yang, Haomin Wang, Qi Wei, Jinhui Yin, Wenhao Li, Erfei Cui, and 2 others. 2025e. Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and effi-ciency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 .Yana Wei, Liang Zhao, Jianjian Sun, Kangheng Lin, Jisheng Yin, Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, En Yu, Haoran Lv, Zejia Weng, Jia Wang, Chunrui Han, Yuang Peng, Qi Han, Zheng Ge, Xiangyu Zhang, Daxin Jiang, and Vishal M. Patel. 2025. Open vision reasoner: Transferring linguistic cognitive behavior for visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05255 .Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Ja-son Weston. 2024. Self-rewarding language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020 .Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, Cong Wei, Botao Yu, Ruibin Yuan, Renliang Sun, Ming Yin, Boyuan Zheng, Zhenzhu Yang, Yibo Liu, Wenhao Huang, and 3 others. 2024a. MMMU: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert AGI. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition .Xiang Yue, Tianyu Zheng, Yuansheng Ni, Yubo Wang, Kai Zhang, Shengbang Tong, Yuxuan Sun, Botao Yu, Ge Zhang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, Wenhu Chen, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2024b. MMMU-Pro: A more robust multi-discipline multimodal understanding bench-mark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02813 .Jianghangfan Zhang, Yibo Yan, Kening Zheng, Xin Zou, Song Dai, and Xuming Hu. 2025a. Gm-prm: A generative multimodal process reward model for multimodal mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04088 .Kaichen Zhang, Keming Wu, Zuhao Yang, Bo Li, Kairui Hu, Bin Wang, Ziwei Liu, Xingxuan Li, and Lidong Bing. 2025b. Openmmreasoner: Pushing the fron-tiers for multimodal reasoning with an open and gen-eral recipe. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16334 .Yang Zhao, Yixin Wang, and Mingzhang Yin. 2024. Permutative preference alignment from listwise ranking of human judgments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04346 .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685 .A Standard GRPO Objective 

For completeness, we summarize the standard GRPO objective used in DeepSeekMath and later RLVR systems (Shao et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). Given rollout rewards {R i}Ni=1 for one sampled group, GRPO first standardizes them within the prompt: 

Ai = Ri − ¯R

std( {R j }Nj=1 ) + ϵA

, ¯R = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

Rj ,

(9) where ϵA is a small constant for numerical stability. Let 

ρi(θ) = πθ(yi | x)

πθold (yi | x) . (10) The clipped GRPO surrogate is          

> LGRPO (θ) = Ex∼D ,{yi}Ni=1 ∼πθold (·| x)
> "
> 1
> N
> NX
> i=1
> ℓclip (θ;x, y i, A i)
> −βDKL (πθ(· | x)∥πref (· | x))
> #

(11) where 

ℓclip (θ; x, y i, A i) = min 

ρi(θ)Ai,

clip( ρi(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ai



(12) Our method does not modify this optimizer; it only changes how Ri is constructed. 

B More Details of Groupwise Ranking Reward 

Groupwise Ranking Reward. For the same prompt, let I+ = {i : rver (yi) = 1 } be the verifier-passed set and let K = |I+|. The groupwise judge reads all textualized candidates {ti}i∈I+ together and returns ordered tie-aware tiers (τ1, . . . , τ M ).We then apply exactly the tie-aware pairwise-win-rate mapping and within-group centering defined in Section 3.2; if K < 2, the auxiliary reward is set to zero. This is only a post-processing of the same 

K-way ranking, not a separate round of pairwise judge calls. A candidate is treated as beating every lower tier, tying candidates in its own tier, and los-ing to every higher tier. For example, if K = 4 and the judge outputs τ1 = {A}, τ2 = {B, C }, and 

τ3 = {D}, then the raw scores before centering are ˜sA = 1 , ˜sB = ˜ sC = 0 .5, and ˜sD = 0 . If all verifier-passed rollouts tie, the centered reward becomes zero for all of them. 

B.1 Reward Judge Instructions 

To make the controlled comparison concrete, we summarize the prompt families used by the three trajectory-supervision variants. The PRM follows a visual stepwise process-reward setup, while the two GR-based variants use the same gpt-oss-20b 

judge backbone with different user instructions. 

PRM instruction. For each trajectory step, the PRM uses the following prompt pair and asks the model to emit exactly one token for the current step:       

> PRM Prompt
> System You are a process reward model. Given the current reasoning step and prior context, output exactly one token: +or -. Use +only if the current step is valid and consistent with the question/context.
> User
> Question
> {question}
> Solution Process
> {step}

When the trajectory has multiple steps, previous steps are replayed as earlier user turns paired with positive assistant replies, and the current step is queried last. The rollout-level PRM reward is then obtained by averaging the per-step rewards. 

Pointwise GR instruction. Pointwise GR uses an instruction that asks the judge to score one tex-tualized trajectory independently:      

> Pointwise GR Instruction
> You are an expert evaluator for reasoning quality. Eval-uate the assistant response based on reasoning-quality assessment.
> Scoring Rubric
> Score the overall reasoning quality on a scalar in [0, 1] , where: •1.0 : clear, logically coherent, and mathematically sound derivation. •0.8 : mostly solid reasoning with only minor slips that do not break the core logic. •0.5 : partially valid reasoning; noticeable gaps or mistakes reduce reliability. •0.2 : largely flawed reasoning with major logical/-calculation issues.

• 0.0 : reasoning is missing, nonsensical, or clearly fails to solve the task. 

Evaluation Guidance 

When assigning the single score, consider the overall logical coherence of the steps, correct use of given conditions or visual facts, calculation and transforma-tion quality, clarity/completeness of the conclusion, and whether uncertainty is handled honestly without unsup-ported guessing. 

Note. The original problem may include image input, but you cannot access the image. If the reasoning refer-ences information that could plausibly come from the image and is not contradicted by available text, do not treat that as an error by itself; score based on textual reasoning quality. 

Output Schema 

Return JSON only with this schema: 

{"reasoning_feedback": "<short explanation of strengths, weaknesses, and key issues>", "judge_score": <float between 0 and 1> }

Generate "reasoning_feedback" first and place 

"judge_score" last. If some information is missing, still provide the best-effort score from available text. 

Problem 

{problem} 

Response 

{response} 

Groupwise Ranking Reward instruction. The groupwise variant uses the same judge backbone but replaces scalar scoring with a tie-aware ranking instruction over all verifier-passed candidates for the same prompt: 

Groupwise Ranking Instruction 

You are ranking multiple candidate solutions to the same geometry problem. 

Problem 

{problem} 

Reference Answer 

{reference_answer} 

Candidate Solutions 

{candidate_solutions} 

Ranking Principles 

1. Audit the reasoning steps, not just the final answer; flag leaps, contradictions, or missing justification. 2. Prioritise solutions whose final answers align with the reference answer. 3. If solutions are equally correct and use materially similar reasoning, give them the same rank; do not force an ordering without a clear qualitative differ-ence. If all are equally correct, all ranks must be 1. 4. When reasoning differs, choose the mathematically valid, well-supported argument even if multiple so-lutions reach the same final answer. 5. Penalise calculation mistakes, invalid assumptions, or logical gaps relative to error-free solutions. 6. Keep the comparison focused on mathematical cor-rectness and clarity. 

Output Format 

Return strict JSON with no commentary: 

{"solutions": [ {"index": 1, "rank": 1, "justification": "Short comparison that explains the placement.", "agreement_with_reference": "match" | "different" | "unknown", "errors": ["optional list of key mistakes"]}, ... ]} 

Rules 

• Lower rank numbers correspond to better solutions. • Use the same rank for tied solutions that should be treated equally. • Include every candidate exactly once. • If you assign the same rank, the numeric rank fields must be identical (e.g., all 1s for a full tie); do not 

output 1,2,3... when you describe them as equal. • Keep the justification concise, citing key reasoning differences or errors that justify the rank. 

C Inconsistency Judge Design and Reliability 

Qualitative manual inspection and observed failure modes. We further conducted targeted manual inspection of the inconsistency judgments across benchmarks to understand the judge’s re-maining failure cases. These inspections suggest that the problematic cases concentrate in a small number of recurring patterns rather than arbitrary misclassifications. The first is image-grounded op-tion semantics . Some multiple-choice problems place the semantic content of the options in the image itself, while the textual prompt only exposes letters such as A/B/C/D. In those cases, a text-only judge may see that the reasoning discusses a con-crete visual choice while the boxed answer contains only a letter, and it can incorrectly flag the sample as inconsistent because the letter-to-content map-ping is visually hidden. The second is implicit answer revision . Some responses mention an early provisional answer, then later switch to a differ-ent boxed answer with only a terse correction or an incomplete explanation. Humans often read the later resolution as the model’s true conclusion, but a strict extractor may attach to the earlier ex-plicit statement and mark the sample inconsistent. These observations clarify the main residual gap between automatic judging and human inspection, and suggest that future improvements should fo-cus on better handling visually grounded option mappings and late-stage answer revisions. 

D Detailed Controlled Comparison 

Table 2 provides the full version of the main con-trolled comparison. Each cell reports the three-number breakdown used throughout the paper: 

RC -Acc , Acc , and CBIR . We place this de-tailed table in the appendix so the main text can emphasize the faithfulness-aware metric directly, while still making the complete accuracy-versus-inconsistency trade-off explicit. 

E More Results on Factors Affecting Inconsistency 

E.1 Question Type and Training Objective 

The five-benchmark evaluation suite is not bal-anced by question type, so raw inconsistency counts are hard to interpret. Across the 2,500 evaluated problems, 1,990 are multiple-choice and 510 are open-ended. The open-ended subset ap-pears only in MathVision (247), MathVista (233), and a small 30-example subset of MMMU, while MMMU-Pro and WeMath are entirely multiple-choice. We therefore normalize every rate in this subsection by the total number of examples within the same question type rather than by the global benchmark total. 0.0 1.5 3.0 4.5 6.0 

Inconsistent Rate (%)        

> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> Strict Accuracy (%)  Question Type
> Multiple-choice
> Open-ended
> Training Setup
> Before
> RLVR
> w/ Groupwise
> Ranking Reward
> Figure 5: Question-type trade-off trajectories under three training settings. Color denotes question type and marker denotes training setup. For each ques-tion type, both trained checkpoints are connected back to the shared before-training model, so the figure shows how RLVR and w/ Groupwise Ranking Reward move the model in strict-accuracy versus inconsistency space. The panel plots StrictAcc against Inconsistent Rate, where Inconsistent Rate denotes the correct-but-inconsistent rate. Every percentage is normalized within the same question type.

Training objective matters more than the raw question-type split. Table 3 and Figure 5 show that the low open-ended inconsistency of the ref-erence checkpoint does not survive outcome-only RL. Before training, IncR is 5.88% for multiple-choice and 1.76% for open-ended. Under RLVR, these rates jump to 20 .40% and 14 .71% , and CBIR 

rises to 6.98% and 3.14% . Question type still changes the absolute level, but the dominant effect is the reward design: outcome-only training pushes both question types toward much larger reasoning-answer mismatch. 

Groupwise Ranking Reward recovers faith-fulness without giving up answer gains. On multiple-choice problems, Groupwise Ranking Re-ward improves StdAcc from 51 .76% to 58 .74% 

while driving IncR below the starting checkpoint, from 5.88% to 3.12% . The open-ended compari-son is even cleaner: RLVR and Groupwise Rank-ing Reward reach the same StdAcc of 44 .71% ,yet Groupwise Ranking Reward cuts IncR from 

14 .71% to 2.75% and CBIR from 3.14% to 0.39% ,which lifts StrictAcc from 41 .57% to 44 .31% . In other words, the open-ended improvement comes almost entirely from better faithfulness rather than better Standard Accuracy. 

The qualitative failure mode still differs by Table 2: Detailed controlled comparison at global step 140. Each cell reports [Strict Accuracy  

> Standard Accuracy / Correct-but-Inconsistent Rate ]

. We bold the best Strict Accuracy in each column and underline the second best.       

> Method Avg. Math Vision Math Vista MMMU MMMU-Pro WeMath
> Reference checkpoints
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B-IT 47.3 49.0 / 1.7 24.8 26.2 / 1.4 67.2 68.6 / 1.4 52.6 55.0 / 2.4 35.2 37.4 / 2.2 56.6 58.0 / 1.4 RLVR 47.4 53.6 / 6.2 22.8 28.6 / 5.8 70.8 75.6 / 4.8 48.2 55.8 / 7.6 36.2 40.4 / 4.2 58.8 67.4 / 8.6
> Controlled comparison with different reward methods w/ PRM 46.8 49.1 / 2.3 26.4 26.8 / 0.4 66.4 70.0 / 3.6 50.0 51.6 / 1.6 30.6 35.2 / 4.6 60.8 61.8 / 1.0
> w/ Pointwise GR 52.3 53.8 / 1.5 31.0 32.4 / 1.4 71.0 72.2 / 1.2 56.6 58.0 / 1.4
> 39.0
> 40.0 / 1.0 63.8 66.2 / 2.4
> w/ Groupwise Ranking Reward
> 54.7
> 55.9 / 1.2
> 31.4
> 33.2 / 1.8
> 74.8
> 76.4 / 1.6
> 57.8
> 58.6 / 0.8 38.8 39.6 / 0.8
> 70.8
> 71.6 / 0.8

Table 3: Question-type breakdown under three training settings. Every percentage is normalized by the total number of examples within the same question type, not by the global benchmark total.                                       

> Training Setup Multiple-choice (n= 1 ,990 )Open-ended (n= 510 )
> StdAcc StrictAcc IncR CBIR StdAcc StrictAcc IncR CBIR
> Before training 51.76% 49.40% 5.88% 2.36% 38.82% 38.63% 1.76% 0.20% RLVR 55.83% 48.84% 20.40% 6.98% 44.71% 41.57% 14.71% 3.14%
> w/ Groupwise Ranking Reward 58.74% 57.39% 3.12% 1.36% 44.71% 44.31% 2.75% 0.39%

question type. For multiple-choice problems, the dominant pattern is still option-selection drift: the reasoning converges to one content answer, but the final boxed output switches to a different option letter or to a nearest-choice guess. For open-ended problems, the mismatch is more often a late revi-sion or answer-type collapse: the model derives one free-form result and then boxes a different scalar, count, or endpoint without a new derivation. These mechanisms differ, but both are strongly amplified by RLVR and sharply reduced by Groupwise Rank-ing Reward. 

E.2 Training Data Distribution: ViRL vs. GSM8K 

A second factor is the RL training data distribu-tion. To study it, we compare two runs that start from the same initialization and are evaluated with the same five-benchmark multimodal inconsistency pipeline, but are trained on two very different data sources: a multimodal image-grounded RL corpus 

ViRL (Wang et al., 2025a), and GSM8K , a pure text arithmetic dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021). Both runs use the same GRPO training framework, but the un-derlying task distributions and correctness signals are not identical across the two datasets. We there-fore present this as an empirical cross-dataset com-parison rather than a clean modality-only causal ablation. 

Figure 6 shows that GSM8K keeps inconsis-tency low while still improving multimodal eval-uation. Relative to the shared initialization, train-ing on GSM8K improves average Standard Accu-racy from 49 .12% to 51 .96% and Strict Accuracy from 47 .20% to 50 .72% . At the same time, overall inconsistency drops from 5.04% to 3.44% , and the correct-but-inconsistent rate drops from 1.92% to 

1.24% . Across training, the inconsistency curves remain in a relatively tight band and stay well be-low the shared initialization. This means that text-only RL data can still transfer useful reasoning discipline to multimodal evaluation, even though it does not directly train image-grounded skills. 

ViRL offers higher upside, but the faithful-ness trade-off is much less stable. On the same evaluation pipeline, ViRL reaches higher answer accuracy and a stronger best RC -Acc than GSM8K. However, this gain is accompanied by substan-tially higher inconsistency, and the later part of training degrades further rather than remaining sta-49        

> 50
> 51
> 52
> 53
> 54
> Accuracy (%)
> Standard Accuracy
> 47
> 48
> 49
> 50
> 51
> 52
> Strict Accuracy
> 020 40 60
> Training Step
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> Rate (%)
> Overall Incon. Rate
> 020 40 60
> Training Step
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> Correct-but-Incons. Rate
> Train on GSM8K Train on ViRL

Figure 6: Average evaluation dynamics when the same RL framework is trained on text-only GSM8K or multi-modal ViRL. Both runs start from the same initialization and are evaluated with the same five-benchmark multi-modal inconsistency pipeline. ViRL reaches higher an-swer accuracy, but its inconsistency grows much faster during training. 

ble. At the end of training, ViRL still keeps Stan-dard Accuracy above the shared initialization at 

52 .88% , but overall inconsistency rises to 8.24% 

and RC -Acc falls to 49 .88% . The same pattern appears broadly across benchmarks rather than in one isolated dataset: at the final checkpoints, ViRL has higher inconsistency than GSM8K on all five evaluation sets, for example 10 .0% vs. 3.0% on MathVision and 7.8% vs. 3.2% on WeMath. 

The training logs support the same asym-metry. We also inspect the judge-flagged in-consistent samples saved from training-time logs. On GSM8K, these cases are nearly absent: only 

0.0% − 0.4% of the 500 inspected rollouts per checkpoint are flagged inconsistent, and high-score inconsistent samples never exceed 0.2% . On ViRL, the corresponding numbers are much larger, rang-ing from 6.2% to 10 .8% for all flagged inconsis-tencies and from 2.4% to 5.6% for inconsistent samples with score > 0.5. This does not prove that multimodality alone causes inconsistency, but it does show that the ViRL training distribution exposes the policy to many more internally mis-matched yet nontrivially rewarded rollouts, which is consistent with the evaluation-side drift in Fig-ure 6. Overall, this comparison suggests that the train-ing data distribution has a first-order effect on faithfulness dynamics under RL. GSM8K behaves like a conservative regularizer: it transfers some answer-format and reasoning discipline, keeps in-consistency low, and improves Strict Accuracy steadily, but its multimodal accuracy ceiling is lim-ited. ViRL has a higher ceiling on multimodal tasks, yet it also produces a much stronger late-stage in-consistency drift. The practical implication is not that text-only data is universally preferable, but that multimodal RL appears to need stronger inconsis-tency control if we want to keep its accuracy gains from turning into reasoning-answer mismatch.