Title: TRACES: Tagging Reasoning Steps for Adaptive Cost-Efficient Early-Stopping

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21057v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:13:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
Preprint. Under review. 

# TRACES: Tagging Reasoning Steps for Adaptive Cost-Efficient Early-Stopping 

Yannis Belkhiter 

IBM Research Europe Trinity College Dublin 

yannis.belkhiter@ibm.com 

Seshu Tirupathi 

IBM Research Europe Dublin, Ireland 

seshutir@ie.ibm.com 

Giulio Zizzo 

IBM Research Europe Dublin, Ireland 

giulio.zizzo2@ibm.com 

John D. Kelleher 

ADAPT Research Centre Trinity College Dublin 

john.kelleher@tcd.ie 

Abstract 

The field of Language Reasoning Models (LRMs) has been very active over the past few years with advances in training and inference techniques enabling LRMs to reason longer, and more accurately. However, a grow-ing body of studies show that LRMs are still inefficient, over-generating verification and reflection steps. Additionally, the high-level role of each reasoning step and how different step types contribute to the generation of correct answers, is largely underexplored. To address this challenge, we introduce TRACES ( Tagging of the Reasoning steps enabling Adaptive 

Cost-Efficient early-Stopping), a lightweight framework that tags reason-ing steps in real-time, and enable adaptive, cost - efficient early stopping of large -language - model inferences. Building on this framework we monitor reasoning behaviors during inferences, and we find that LRMs tend to shift their reasoning behavior after reaching a correct answer. We demonstrate that the monitoring of the specific type of steps can produce effective in-terpretable early stopping criteria. We evaluate the TRACES framework on three mathematical reasoning benchmarks, namely, MATH500, GSM8K, AIME and two knowledge and reasoning benchmarks, MMLU and GPQA respectively. We achieve 20 to 50% token reduction while maintaining comparable accuracy to standard generation. 

1 Introduction 

For the past few years, the field of Language Reasoning Models (LRMs) has experienced significant growth in terms of capabilities. Initiated by the work on model prompting such as Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2023) and Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023), Inference Time Scaling has emerged as a popular field with the goal of making models more accurate at reasoning. At the same time, fundamental work on Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) as part of Training Time Scaling has led to the release of strong System-2 reasoning models. However, recent studies have shown that LRMs need to generate a very large number of tokens — several thousands — in order to generate accurate answers for challenging questions (Qu et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025b; Sui et al., 2025a). This behavior makes reasoning models extremely inefficient - scaling in both compute resources and inference time. Although recent works have suggested solutions to this problem, the existing literature lacks work understanding the role of reasoning steps towards generation of correct answers (Yu et al., 2026). Furthermore, efficient inference-time scaling methods are either static -fixed budgets/prompt compression, lacking of interpretability - or dynamic, but they do not exploit the semantic content of reasoning steps to guide early stopping. As a result, most existing approaches to reduce the verbosity of LRMs overlook the possibility of monitoring 1

> arXiv:2604.21057v1 [cs.CL] 22 Apr 2026

Preprint. Under review. Standard LRM inference 

user LRM 

Find the roots of (x - 3)^3 + (x -7)^3 = (2x - 10)^3. 

Monolithic answer from the model 

3720 tokens - 133.11s. of inference 

TRACES framework 

> LRM Lightweight
> Step-Tagging
> module Okay, so I need to find the roots of the equation \\((x - 3)^3 + (x - 7)^3 = (2x - 10)^3\\). Hmm, that looks a bit intimidating at first glance, but maybe I can break it down step by step. Let me see. First, I notice that both sides of the equation have Fsimilar structures. On the left side, we have two cubic terms: \\((x - 3)^3\\) and \\((x - 7)^3\\). On the right side, it's a single cubic term: \\((2x - 10)^3\\). Hmm, I wonder if there's a relationship between these terms that I can exploit. Now, let's check each of these solutions in the original equation to make sure they are valid.**Checking \\(x = 3\ \):**Left-hand side (LHS):\\[\n(3 - 3)^3 + (3 - 7)^3 = 0^3 + (-4)^3 = 0 + (-64) = -64\n\\]Right-hand side (RHS):\\ [\n2(3) - 10 = 6 - 10 = -4\n\\]\n\\[\n(-4)^3 = -64\n\\]So, LHS = RHS. Therefore, \\(x = 3\\) is a valid solution.

1. Tag each step generated as 

constructive or 

evaluative 

2. Detect when the model swithes to evaluating its current answer 3. Early-stop with answer forcing Final Answer :\boxed{3}, \boxed{5}, and \boxed{7} R =

> Step 2
> Defintion Recall
> [Intermediate steps] [Intermediate steps]
> Step 35
> Verification

Evaluative Constructive Constructive 

+

> Tag Tracker
> Step 1
> Problem Re-statement

Structured generation with tagged steps 

974 tokens - 39.85s. of inference 30 to 50% token-count reduction with minimal accuracy loss Okay, so I need to find the roots of the equation \\((x - 3)^3 + (x - 7)^3 = (2x - 10)^3\\). Hmm, that looks a bit intimidating at first glance, but maybe I can break it down step by step. Let me see. [...] [...] </think> The roots of the equation are \\(\ \boxed{3}\\), \\(\\boxed{5}\\), and \\(\\boxed{7}\\). user 

LRM    

> Step 1Step 2Step 35
> Answer forcing
> ...

Find the roots of (x - 3)^3 + (x -7)^3 = (2x - 10)^3. 

110 steps - 3.5k tokens 

Figure 1: TRACES: a framework for monitoring and early-stopping the generation of LRMs - example on sample 36 from MATH500 test with DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B - seed 42 

the reasoning as it is being generated, and using this information to improve LRMs efficiency. To address this challenge, this paper aims to offer a new perspective on the efficiency of LRMs by focusing on online monitoring of models. Our contributions are as follows: • Step-Tagging module: We introduce the Step-Tagging module (see Figure 1), an online lightweight classifier capable of identifying the nature of each step that LRMs are gener-ating. To encompass the various possible reasoning behaviors, we propose ReasonType , a fine-grained taxonomy of reasoning steps enabling structured identification of steps. • TRACES, an interpretable early-stopping framework: Leveraging the Step-Tagging 

module, we found that LRM’s step-types shift after generating a correct answer, moving from the construction of the answer to its evaluation . Based on these observations, we built a black-box early-stopping framework (TRACES) that dynamically stops token generation when such transition phase is detected. Tested on 3 open-source LRMs across 5 reasoning datasets, our framework reduced token-count by 20-50% with minimal accuracy loss. 

2 Related Work 

To render models less verbose and more efficient, Train and Test Time Scaling approaches have been explored (Qu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025a) and recent work has explored monitoring the generation of LRMs (Lee & Hockenmaier, 2025; Luo et al., 2025b). 

Efficient Reasoning through Training. Using SFT approaches, work such as Xia et al. (2025) explored fine-tuning models on compressed reasoning traces to limit the verbosity of LRM generation. Other papers have suggested various RL algorithms designed to make models more efficient. For instance, Luo et al. (2025a); Team et al. (2025); Yu et al. (2025) showed that including a length component in the reward function leads to more efficient inference. 

Efficient Reasoning during Inference. Researchers have also explored Inference Time Scaling technique to increase the efficiency of models (Qu et al., 2025). Model Switch uses a router module to select small or large models for inference depending on the complexity of the problem (Ong et al., 2025). Similarly, System Switch looked at dynamically selecting inference settings based on the problem (Aytes et al., 2025). Length Budgeting aims to reduce the budget allocated to the generation of answers. Works such as Lee et al. (2025); Han et al. (2025); Xu et al. (2025) showed that careful prompt engineering can lead to more efficient generation compared to standard inference. In addition, Pu et al. (2025) demonstrated that calibration experiments can be performed to estimate the optimal number of tokens to solve particular problems. However, these techniques often lack interpretability since they rely on either prompting or token-count estimation. Furthermore, these techniques define constraints before inference and so remain static and do not adapt to the evolving reasoning traces of the model. As a result, they cannot exploit the information contained in the model’s own generated reasoning during inference. 2Preprint. Under review. 

Monitoring LRM generation. We observe an emerging theme of research on monitoring LRM generation at a step level. Specifically, Lee & Hockenmaier (2025) proposes a taxonomy of reasoning traces evaluators. However, the authors acknowledged that existing monitoring approaches are not adapted to complex reasoning traces. Similarly, Golovneva et al. (2023) prompts a model to generate step-by-step reasoning, and defines an error-type taxonomy to evaluate reasoning steps. Nevertheless, this method is post-hoc and focuses on measuring the quality of reasoning. Furthermore, Luo et al. (2025b) decomposes long reasoning traces by prompting an LLM to parse reasoning steps and assigns to each step one high-level class -from a taxonomy of four step-types. However, this approach is applied for training purposes and does not monitor reasoning during inference. Closer to our work, LCoT2Tree converts long CoT into hierarchical tree structures to analyse the reasoning patterns of LRMs (Jiang et al., 2025). The framework classifies thoughts into types of reasoning, but their framework is applied after the generation, and is not applied dynamically. Taking a white-box approach, Venhoff et al. (2025) derive a taxonomy of reasoning behaviors through trained Sparse Auto-encoders on step activations, clustering them to identify common behaviors. While their approach results in a rich taxonomy, their technique requires full-access to the model’s internals. Yu et al. (2026) also note that “the high-level semantic roles of reasoning steps and their transitions remain underexplored.” . As a result, existing works often overlook the question of how to dynamically monitor LRMs reasoning during single inferences from text alone .Furthermore, existing monitoring methods are not applied for early-stopping purposes .

Monitoring for dynamic efficient inference. While existing early-stopping methods above are defined before inference, recent work has also explored early-stopping dynamically. Yang et al. (2025) proposes dynamic early stopping criteria based on the model’s confidence (DEER). Similarly, Wang et al. (2025) suggests an early-stopping criteria based on the entropy of the tokens generated after forcing the generation of end-of-thinking tokens (EAT). However, both DEER and EAT rely on model’s internals, require white-box LRMs for analysis by nature, and does not exploit the the text content of the reasoning trace itself. 

Contributions. Our TRACES framework addresses the following gaps: • Online, interpretable step classification. Existing efficient inference-time methods treat LRMs as a black-box and apply fixed or dynamic constraints based on signals that carry no interpretation on what the model is doing at each step. We address this by proposing an online tagging framework that classifies the nature of each steps that is generated. • Black-box inference monitoring. Existing step-level monitoring methods are either applied after generation, or requires access to the model’s internals. We address this with an online black-box monitoring module that requires only text generated of LRMs. • Content-aware dynamic early-stopping. No prior work bridges online step-type moni-toring to dynamic early-stopping. We address this by building a novel dynamic early-stopping controller driven by the live sequence of classified step types. 

3 Monitoring the reasoning process of LRMs 

The concept of a reasoning step is central in evaluating and improving the generation of LRMs. However, defining a reasoning step is a non-trivial problem. As highlighted by Yao et al. (2023); Lee & Hockenmaier (2025); Cao et al. (2025), various definitions exists depending on the models, the problem, and the research goals. In this section, we survey existing approaches and select the one most commonly adopted in the literature. 

Step-by-step generation. Rather than viewing the model’s output as a monolithic text sequence, recent work has shifted towards decomposing generation of LRMs into discrete steps (see Appendix B.1). This decomposition enables finer-grained analysis of model behavior and facilitates targeted interventions. Building upon the auto-regressive generation of LLMs (Schuurmans et al., 2024), we first formalize the notion of stepwise generation .Let y = y1: n ∈ Vn be the output token sequence generated by the model over the vocabulary 

V. We define a reasoning delimiter token α ∈ V. Let R = {r0 = 1, . . . , ri, . . . , rT = n} denote the indices in y corresponding to the occurrence of α in y. r0 and rT correspond to the first and last indexes of y1: n. Based on these indices, we define a sequence - of length T - of 3Preprint. Under review. reasoning steps formed by y1: n with the delimiter α:

S = {s1, . . . , si, . . . , sT }, such as si = yri−1:ri (1) where each step si corresponds to a sub-part of the full output y. From the literature, in Appendix B.1, multiple delimiters have been defined. In this paper, we segmented the reasoning traces based on the delimiter α = "\n\n" (Zhang et al., 2025). Building on this segmentation, we introduce Step-Tagging : a lightweight module capable of identifying, and tagging reasoning steps in real-time during inference. 

Step-Tagging module. Our definition of a reasoning step enables users to segment reasoning steps within model outputs. However, this definition alone does not allow the user to annotate the segmented steps with reasoning types. Such annotation would enable users to track logical transitions within model outputs. To do this, we must first define a tag dictionary Ttags (i.e., a label space of reasoning step tags) that covers the types of reasoning steps generated by models. Given a sequence of reasoning steps S = {s1, s2, . . . , sT }, we wish to label each step si with a tag τi ∈ T tags . Formally, we are looking to construct a step-tagging function ϕ such as: 

∀ i ∈ [1, T], ϕ(si) = τi (2) where si ∈ S is a reasoning step from the full output sequence y, ϕ is the step-tagging function, and τi ∈ T tags is the reasoning tag associated to the step si.

Taxonomy of the type of steps. To enable fine-grained monitoring of reasoning behavior, we need to know the different types of reasoning steps that are typically generated by LRMs (i.e., we need to define Ttags ). To do so, we created a taxonomy based on the outputs of both 

DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) and QwQ-32B (Team, 2025) models. ReasonType: a Taxonomy of Reasoning Steps       

> 1. Problem Re-statement 4. Formula Substitution 8. Verification 10. Alternative Approach / Exploration 9. Heuristic / Intuition 11. Interpretation 12. Self-Talk 13. Final Conclusion 14. Other 6. Edge Case 7. Pattern Recognition 2. Context Repetition 3. Definition Recall 5. Symbolic Transformation
> Early reasoning (Setup) Mid-reasoning (Calculus and problem solving) Late-reasoning (Analysis and Reflexion) End-reasoning (Conclusion)

Figure 2: ReasonType - A taxonomy of reasoning step types as per gpt-4o-mini 

Inspired by prior work on model behavior analysis (Galichin et al., 2025; Kuznetsov et al., 2025), we first created a prompt to identify distinct types of reasoning steps in the traces. We then sampled 100 reasoning traces from the MATH500 train dataset (covering 20 sam-ples per difficulty level for each model) and using our prompt submitted the traces to 

GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI et al., 2024). The prompt resulted in a series of different step-types. We merged overlapping categories, to construct a taxonomy that reflects the temporal and reasoning progression of model’s traces. We refer to this taxonomy as ReasonType (Figure 2) encompassing 13 categories, including early-stage behaviors such as Definition Recall , and later reasoning stages like Verification and Exploration . Our process is detailed in Appendix C.1. To validate our taxonomy, we conducted a series of ablation studies in Appendices C.3, C.4, and C.5, assessing the reliability, robustness, and generalization of our taxonomy, respectively. 

4 Experimental Setting 

Our paper contains two objectives. First, our goal is to prove that LRMs change their reasoning behavior after knowing the answer for the first time ( Claim 1 ). Furthermore, we show that the we can monitor reasoning phase transition robustly using lightweight classifiers, and that such monitoring can be used to make the generation of LRMs more efficient ( Claim 2 ). In this section, we will first motivate our selection of models, datasets, metrics, and inference settings followed by our baseline implementation. 4Preprint. Under review. 

Model selection. To apply our framework a user must have access to the fine-grained reasoning traces of LRMs. However, many high-performing closed-source models (such as, o3 and Claude 3.7) do not expose raw reasoning traces. Instead, these models output summaries of thinking tokens generated, which can bias the estimation of their efficiency compared to open-source models. In contrast, open-source models like DeepSeek-R1 and QwQ consistently provide reasoning traces. For this reason, we focus our analysis ex-clusively on DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B , DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B and QwQ-32B , which offer the granularity needed to monitor the reasoning process. This choice is motivated by their variety in term of size, full open-source availability, and diversity in providers. 

Datasets. To assess our approach, we selected five state-of-the-art reasoning datasets. Table 1 in Appendix B.2 presents the datasets that we selected. First, we evaluated our models on mathematical tasks. We selected 3 datasets, with growing level of difficulty. Indeed, GSM8K ,

MATH500 , and AIME are issued from high-school, mathematic competition, and Olympiads, respectively. More complex tasks requires the model to generate more tokens, allowing us to test our framework upon different circumstances. Second, we evaluated the applicability of our framework on different domains. GPQA-Diamond evaluates the model reasoning ability on Physics or Biology PhD-level questions, while MMLU-Pro evaluate larger range of domains. We evaluated the correctness of the answers using Math-Verify (mathematic tasks) or MCQ-Prompting (knowledge and reasoning benchmarks). Appendix B.2 details our evaluation set-up. Our analysis in Section 5 and the training of our step-tagger is conducted on the training splits . We then evaluated TRACES in Section 6 on the held-out testing splits .

Inference setting. To monitor the steps and intervene in the generation process, we suggest a new definition of the generation process of LRMs. We assume that each model generates one token at a time, and we split the steps dynamically. However, for the purposes of our experiments instead of re-designing the generation process, we performed standard inference and applied our Step-Tagging and TRACES algorithms offline . To ensure the robustness and reproducibility of our approach, we generated five outputs per test sample using fixed random seeds (namely 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44), with deterministic decoding. The five-seed evaluation was conducted on GSM8K and MATH500 across all three model sizes (8B, 14B, 32B). Due to computational constraints, for AIME, GPQA and MMLU, we report results on a single seed (42) using the 14B model. The low variance observed across seeds on GSM8K and MATH500 (see Table 10 in Appendix I.1) justifies the usage of a single seed, and is consistent with common practices (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). 

Baselines. To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we define two baselines: • Ideal Early stopping - IE S : We observe a growing understanding that, up to a token-budget, thinking longer may be leading to worse results (Hassid et al., 2026; Muennighoff et al., 2025). Yang et al. (2025) observes that certain models achieved correct answers very early in the generation, and defines the Pearl Reasoning - i.e. the minimal number of steps needed by a model to get a correct answer. Inspired by this work, we define the Ideal Early Stopping , which prompts the model after every step generated to retrieve its current best answer (i.e. answer forcing). By doing so, we identify the first step where the model reaches the correct answer - if any (see Algorithm 1 in Appendix D.1 for implementation). • Prompt-guided efficiency - Pguided : We also observe that LRMs are sensitive to the input prompt (Lee et al., 2025). In this case, we compare our framework with user-prompt and system-prompt variants, with Zero-Shot and Few-Shot prompts that aim to reduce the reasoning computation while retaining accuracy. We explicitly instruct the models to not generate verbose output, or over-verification steps. We select 4 variants, namely: zero-shot user and system prompt, and few-shot system prompt with 1 and 3 examples: 

> P(0) user

, P(0) system , P(1) system , P(3) system , respectively (see Figure 15 in Appendix D.2). Our Step-Tagging method enables us to track the semantic progression of the reasoning process. By definition, our IE S baseline allows us to identify the first step in the reasoning trace at which the model produces the correct answer. This provides a reference point for analyzing how the reasoning evolves with respect to answer correctness. In the following section, we observe that LRMs generate different type of reasoning steps before and after reaching the correct answer in their reasoning trace. 5Preprint. Under review. 

5 Influence of the step-type on the model’s efficiency 

Ideal Early-Stopping. Let SIES ∈ S = {s1, . . . , sT } be the first step where the model expressed the correct answer. If the trace is incorrect, SIES = sT . To begin, we computed the SIES on the training datasets. To better observe reasoning patterns leading to correct answers, the experiments in this section are pruned on correct samples . Figure 12 in Appendix D.1 presents the position of SIES relatively to the number of steps. The IE S algorithm show the inefficiency of the models on reasoning datasets, with answer reached within 33% of the full reasoning steps on average. It confirms that frequently, the model knows the correct answer very early in its reasoning trace, but still continues to generate (see Yang et al. (2025)). 

Distribution shift of the step-types after Pearl Reasoning. On the strength of this ob-servation, we analyse the model behavior after reaching the correct answer. To do so, we labeled the reasoning traces, and separated the steps happening before and after the SIES 

step. Specifically, we define Sbefore = {s1, . . . , sIES } and Safter = {sIES +1, . . . , sT }, where 

S = {s1, . . . , st} = Sbefore  

> S

Safter . Figure 3 shows the step-type frequency distribution of 

Sbefore and Safter across samples, in blue and orange, respectively. 

Figure 3: Step-Type distribution before and after the Ideal Early Stopping step SIES - Categories are ordered by decreasing value of distribution difference before and after SIES , from DS-8B GSM8K 

In Figure 3, we observe a common pattern across most models and datasets. Step-types such as Problem-Restatement or Definition Recall represent a high proportion of step-types before the model generates a correct answer for the first time (bars in orange), and their proportion drop after (bars in blue). By the nature of the labels, we refer to these step-types as Constructive . Conversely, other step-types such as Verification or Final Conclusion 

demonstrate opposite behavior: those steps are not present before the SIES step, but are of high proportion after. We refer to these labels as Evaluative .

From distribution shift to detecting reasoning phase transition. Building on this observa-tion, we are looking to observe the distribution shift more closely through the reasoning process. Let τconstructive = {τ1, . . . , τn} and τevaluative = {τ1, . . . , τm} be two classes of tags, including step-types typically occurring before and after the SIES step in the reasoning flow, respectively. Equation 3 defines an early-stopping criteria such as: 

Ri = ∑ij=1 1[τj ∈ τconstructive ]

∑ij=1 1[τj ∈ τconstructive ] + 1[τj ∈ τevaluative ] (3) For a running sequence of steps Srunning = {s1, . . . , si}, Ri represents the cumulative ratio of the constructive steps compared to the sum of constructive and evaluative steps. From Figure 3, we expect Ri to suddenly decrease when the reasoning switch from constructive to evaluative 

state. Indeed, τconstructive is rare after SIES , and τevaluative is frequent. From Figure 3, we observed that τconstructive and τevaluative are common across models and datasets. For the 6Preprint. Under review. rest of the paper, we fix τconstructive = {τProblem-Restatement , τDefinition Recall } and τevaluative =

{τVerification , τFinal Conclusion } across selected models and datasets. 

Quantifying the reasoning phase transition. Figure 4 shows the average ratio R across samples, for the selected configurations. Each datasets leads to different numbers of steps and ideal early-stopping indices. For this reason, we normalized the reasoning process. We set the x-axis as |Si |−| SIES ||S| , where |Si| is the step index, |SIES | the index of the IES, and |S| the overall number of step. Negative and positive values represent the reasoning flow before and after the model gets the answer, respectively, with x = 0 highlighting the SIES steps. In Figure 4, the ratio R is high and relatively constant for most configurations before SIES .This confirms that before SIES , the model tends to generate steps re-sponsible for shaping its answer, and rarely generates steps verifying its current solution. Right after SIES , we observe a sudden drop in R values. It shows that after SIES , the model transition from constructing its an-swer, to evaluating and verifying it. Figure 4: Ratio R - Reasoning Phase Transition We interpret this result as a shift in the reasoning mode of LRMs. Before getting to the correct answer, the model generates specific step-types helping to shape and solve the problem (τconstr. ). Once it got the answer, the model shift from constructing its answer to evaluating it ( τeval. ). Figures 13 and 14 in Appendix D.1 further support our interpretation. Our results across the training datasets indicate that the ratio R constitutes a good signal for tracking the reasoning phase transition, and estimating the SIES step. While the analysis presented in this section is conducted on the training datasets, the following section will validate this signal on the held-out test reasoning datasets. 

6 ST-ES: an interpretable early-stopping condition 

Building on our observations from Section 5, we examine the ratio R as a good early-stopping signal. In this section, the central challenge that we address is to determine when to stop the generation of LRMs based on the value of R, creating an interpretable stopping criterion. We first suggest a stopping-criteria based on our results from Section 5. We then show that a lightweight sentence classifier can enable online estimation of the ratio R. We conclude by demonstrating its effectiveness on the test datasets. 

Early-stopping criteria. Assuming that our Step-Tagging module can effectively monitor the steps (Equation 2), we can define a constraint cτ∗ on R computed from the monitoring of our model. Each constraint operates online, over a running sequence of reasoning steps 

Srunning = {s1, . . . , si}, where step sj has a tag τj ∈ τ∗ = {τconstructive , τevaluative , τothers }:

cτ∗ (Srunning , δ) = 1[R(Srunning , τconstructive , τevaluation ) > δ] (4) 

cτ∗ (Srunning , δ) is the constraint on the ratio Ri over the step-sequence Srunning being gen-erated, given the threshold δ. While the constraint cτ∗ is satisfied, the generation con-tinues. If the constraint is violated for w consecutive steps, the generation stops (see Algorithm 3 in Appendix E.2 for more implementation details). From Figure 4, we set 

δ ∈ [0.9, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, 0.5, 0.4 ], and w = 5 for all configurations (models and datasets). 

Answer forcing. To early-exit the generation of LRMs, we adopted common practices and prompted LRMs right after the stopping signal to retrieve their current best answer with an additional budget of 100 tokens. We borrowed this approach from Muennighoff et al. (2025), who showed that such intervention helped to adapt the computation of models. 

Lightweight Step-Tagger for estimating ratio R. Given that our reasoning step taxonomy was created using GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI et al., 2024) the most direct way to label a reasoning trace would be to use GPT-4o-mini. However, this GPT-4o-mini annotation is costly, each step requiring around a second to be annotated (see Table 4 in Appendix C.2). Consequently, 7Preprint. Under review. instead, we use GPT-4o-mini to label a dataset of reasoning traces with the labels from the taxonomy that we use to train a light weight reasoning step classifiers. We construct training datasets by running each LRMs on the training datasets (with a seed of 42). For each step si

in generated outputs, we prompted GPT-4o-mini to assign a tag τi. Appendix C.3 confirms the reliability of GPT-4o-mini to annotate the reasoning steps. 

Universal Step-Tagger. To estimate the ratio R and build our early-stopping criterion defined in Equation 3 and 4, respectively, we need a way to identify the τconstructive and 

τevaluative steps. To do so, we trained a BERT classifier on a 3-class classification problem (see Appendix F for details). Importantly, we want our method to generalize across models and datasets. To this extent, we train our classifier on the traces of DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B 

across MATH500 and GPQA train split (mathematical and in-domain data). We then evaluate our classifier on traces of the same model on three held-out datasets (GSM8K, AIME, and GPQA), and on the two other models on two datasets (MATH500 and GSM8K). Figure 5 present the perfor-mance of our step-tagging mod-ule on the training reasoning traces. We observe a good per-formance of the held-out test from the training data, with Macro-F1 ranging from 0.82 to 0.83. Importantly, we observe that our module generalizes well on others models and data (Macro-F1 from 0.76 to 0.88). Figure 5: Performance of the Step-Tagging module We interpret the strong performance of the classifiers as validating our approach, as well as our reasoning step taxonomy in the sense that it indicates that the step types are distinct. As well, we managed to build universal step-tagging modules – good generalization on unseen models and datasets – demonstrating that the training efforts can significantly be reduced. 

TRACES framework. Next, we show in this section that Step-Tagging modules can ef-fectively be used as an early-stopping criteria. Figure 6 presents the average token count against the Avg@5 for the three LRMs on the MATH500 and GSM8K datasets, as well as the Pass@1 of DS-14B on AIME, GPQA and MMLU. Each plot compares the performance trade-offs between the baselines and the ST-ES criteria. Tables 9 and 11 in the Appendix I report the quantitative metrics of the baselines and our approach on all configurations. 

Pguided baselines. We first notice that simple instruction on the models results in strong token-reduction, achieving 20% to 60% saved tokens across configurations. Specifically, the baselines are giving much better results on QwQ-32B , and the system-prompt variants generally lead to more token-reduction for the Deepseek models. While our prompt-guided baselines provide a fair point of comparison under equivalent setting (TRACES and prompt-guided baselines requires no prior knowledge on the computation budget needed), we further compare our TRACES framework against token-count baselines in Appendix D.3, demonstrating competitive performance at matched token-count. 

Performance of TRACES. Next, we observe that our TRACES criteria effectively leads to more efficient generation, with all TRACES settings lying on the left side of the Efficiency line compared to the Standard inference for all models. Furthermore, the TRACES criteria appear to outperform most Pguided baselines for both Deepseek models. Indeed, our TRACES criteria is performing well on the DS-Llama8B model on both MATH500 and GSM8K since almost all TRACES configurations lie on the Pareto front. On GSM8K (Figure 6a), ST-ES with δ = 0.8 achieved approximately the same token reduction as P(0) user and P(1) system (around 42%), while maintaining higher Avg@5 (0.79 vs. 0.775 and 0.754). On MATH500 (Figure 6d), TRACES δ=0.5 achieves the same token reduction as P(0) system and P(3) system (around 30%) while maintaining higher Avg@5 (0.83 vs. 0.82 and 0.79, respectively). DS-Qwen14B and QwQ-32B 

also show good performance, obtaining similar token-count gains. 8Preprint. Under review.       

> (a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K
> (d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500
> (g) DS-Qwen14B on AIME (h) DS-Qwen14B on GPQA (i) DS-Qwen14B on MMLU-Pro

Figure 6: Number of Tokens vs. Avg@5 and Pass@1 - Pguided Baselines vs. TRACES criteria on test datasets - The efficiency lines in red highlight the configurations that improve the efficiency relative to the standard inference, while the Pareto frontiers in yellow show the most efficient approaches. TRACES achieved up to 20 − 50% token-count saving with minimal accuracy loss. 

Generalization to other tasks. To assess robustness beyond MATH500 and GSM8K dataset, we evaluate our framework to AIME, as well as GPQA-Diamond and MMLU-Pro on DS-14B. Our results indicate that TRACES scales well on more complex tasks – specifically on GPQA and MMLU. Moreover, it shows that reasoning-step monitoring is not tied to mathematical structure and that the TRACES remains effective across diverse reasoning tasks. 

Adaptability of TRACES. Our findings supports that the value of the threshold can help controlling the computations. While the performance decreases sharply on harder reasoning tasks, we systematically find across models and datasets that δ ∈ [0.4, 0.6 ] and [0.7, 0.9 ] offers around 20 − 35% and 40 − 70% token-count reduction, respectively. It supports the view that harder reasoning tasks need less restrictive – lower – thresholds, as more evaluative steps are required to maintain accuracy. We extend this discussion in Appendix G.1. 

Influencing factors of TRACES. To assess the robustness of our framework, we conducted ablation studies to evaluate the influence of the nature of the classes used by the Ratio R,on the step-type taxonomy, and on the performance of Step-Taggers in Appendices G.2, G.3, G.4, respectively. We summarized our findings in Appendix G.5. We also evaluated 9Preprint. Under review. the latency and the training-inference cost of our framework in Appendices H.1 and H.2, respectively. 

7 Conclusion 

This work offers a novel view on both monitoring and efficiency of LRMs. We propose 

ReasonType , a novel taxonomy of reasoning steps, and demonstrated that users can effectively track the reasoning flow of the generation using our TRACES framework. Furthermore, we show that differentiating the step-type in the generation of LRMs is important, and can be used as a reliable and interpretable early-stopping criterion. Through careful monitoring of specific step-types, our framework can enhance the control of the generation of RLMs enabling a significant token-count saving (up to 50%) while preserving performance, with the largest gains on complex tasks. 

Acknowledgment 

This research was partly supported by the ADAPT Research Centre. The ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology is funded under the Research Ireland’s Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106 II) and is co-funded under the European Regional Develop-ment Funds. 

References 

Simon A. Aytes, Jinheon Baek, and Sung Ju Hwang. Sketch-of-thought: Efficient llm reasoning with adaptive cognitive-inspired sketching, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2503.05179 .Sher Badshah and Hassan Sajjad. Reference-guided verdict: Llms-as-judges in automatic evaluation of free-form qa, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.09235 .Lang Cao, Yingtian Zou, Chao Peng, Renhong Chen, Wu Ning, and Yitong Li. Step guided reasoning: Improving mathematical reasoning using guidance generation and step rea-soning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.19817 .Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mo-hammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374 .Qiguang Chen, Libo Qin, Jinhao Liu, Dengyun Peng, Jiannan Guan, Peng Wang, Mengkang Hu, Yuhang Zhou, Te Gao, and Wanxiang Che. Towards reasoning era: A survey of long chain-of-thought for reasoning large language models, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2503.09567 .Xingyu Chen, Jiahao Xu, Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Jianhui Pang, Dian Yu, Linfeng Song, Qiuzhi Liu, Mengfei Zhou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Rui Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Do not think that much for 2+3=? on the overthinking of o1-like llms, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.21187 .Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher 10 Preprint. Under review. Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168 .DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, and Haowei Zhang et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2501.12948 .Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/1810.04805 .Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark, and Tushar Khot. Complexity-based prompting for multi-step reasoning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00720 .Andrey Galichin, Alexey Dontsov, Polina Druzhinina, Anton Razzhigaev, Oleg Y. Rogov, Elena Tutubalina, and Ivan Oseledets. I have covered all the bases here: Interpreting reasoning features in large language models via sparse autoencoders, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.18878 .Olga Golovneva, Moya Chen, Spencer Poff, Martin Corredor, Luke Zettlemoyer, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, and Asli Celikyilmaz. Roscoe: A suite of metrics for scoring step-by-step reasoning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07919 .Tingxu Han, Zhenting Wang, Chunrong Fang, Shiyu Zhao, Shiqing Ma, and Zhenyu Chen. Token-budget-aware llm reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18547 .Michael Hassid, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Roy Schwartz. Don’t overthink it. preferring shorter thinking chains for improved llm reasoning, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2505.17813 .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03874 .Yuzhen Huang, Weihao Zeng, Xingshan Zeng, Qi Zhu, and Junxian He. From accuracy to robustness: A study of rule- and model-based verifiers in mathematical reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22203 .Gangwei Jiang, Yahui Liu, Zhaoyi Li, Qi Wang, Fuzheng Zhang, Linqi Song, Ying Wei, and Defu Lian. What makes a good reasoning chain? uncovering structural patterns in long chain-of-thought reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22148 .Kristian Kuznetsov, Laida Kushnareva, Polina Druzhinina, Anton Razzhigaev, Anastasia Voznyuk, Irina Piontkovskaya, Evgeny Burnaev, and Serguei Barannikov. Feature-level insights into artificial text detection with sparse autoencoders, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.03601 .Ayeong Lee, Ethan Che, and Tianyi Peng. How well do llms compress their own chain-of-thought? a token complexity approach, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01141 .Jinu Lee and Julia Hockenmaier. Evaluating step-by-step reasoning traces: A survey, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12289 .Zhong-Zhi Li, Duzhen Zhang, Ming-Liang Zhang, Jiaxin Zhang, Zengyan Liu, Yuxuan Yao, Haotian Xu, Junhao Zheng, Pei-Jie Wang, Xiuyi Chen, Yingying Zhang, Fei Yin, Jiahua Dong, Zhiwei Li, Bao-Long Bi, Ling-Rui Mei, Junfeng Fang, Xiao Liang, Zhijiang Guo, Le Song, and Cheng-Lin Liu. From system 1 to system 2: A survey of reasoning large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17419 .Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050 .11 Preprint. Under review. Yuliang Liu, Junjie Lu, Zhaoling Chen, Chaofeng Qu, Jason Klein Liu, Chonghan Liu, Zefan Cai, Yunhui Xia, Li Zhao, Jiang Bian, Chuheng Zhang, Wei Shen, and Zhouhan Lin. Adaptivestep: Automatically dividing reasoning step through model confidence, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13943 .Haotian Luo, Li Shen, Haiying He, Yibo Wang, Shiwei Liu, Wei Li, Naiqiang Tan, Xiaochun Cao, and Dacheng Tao. O1-pruner: Length-harmonizing fine-tuning for o1-like reasoning pruning, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12570 .Yijia Luo, Yulin Song, Xingyao Zhang, Jiaheng Liu, Weixun Wang, GengRu Chen, Wenbo Su, and Bo Zheng. Deconstructing long chain-of-thought: A structured reasoning optimiza-tion framework for long cot distillation, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16385 .Sara Vera Marjanovi ´c, Arkil Patel, Vaibhav Adlakha, Milad Aghajohari, Parishad BehnamGhader, Mehar Bhatia, Aditi Khandelwal, Austin Kraft, Benno Krojer, Xing Han L `u, Nicholas Meade, Dongchan Shin, Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Gaurav Kamath, Marius Mosbach, Karolina Sta ´nczak, and Siva Reddy. Deepseek-r1 thoughtology: Let’s think about llm reasoning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07128 .Gouki Minegishi, Hiroki Furuta, Takeshi Kojima, Yusuke Iwasawa, and Yutaka Matsuo. Topology of reasoning: Understanding large reasoning models through reasoning graph properties, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05744 .Filip Moons and Ellen Vandervieren. Measuring agreement among several raters clas-sifying subjects into one or more (hierarchical) categories: A generalization of fleiss’ kappa. Behavior Research Methods , 57(10), September 2025. ISSN 1554-3528. doi: 10.3758/s13428-025-02746-8. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-025-02746-8 .Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Cand `es, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time scaling, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19393 .Geunseob Oh, Rahul Goel, Chris Hidey, Shachi Paul, Aditya Gupta, Pararth Shah, and Rushin Shah. Improving top-k decoding for non-autoregressive semantic parsing via intent conditioning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06748 .Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tianhao Wu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica. Routellm: Learning to route llms with preference data, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18665 .OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, and Sandhini Agarwal et al. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 .Yoonjeong Park, Hyunjin Kim, Chanyeol Choi, Junseong Kim, and Jy-Yong Sohn. Can sepa-rators improve chain-of-thought prompting? In 2024 2nd International Conference on Foun-dation and Large Language Models (FLLM) , pp. 493–500. IEEE, November 2024. doi: 10.1109/ fllm63129.2024.10852507. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FLLM63129.2024.10852507 .Debjit Paul, Mete Ismayilzada, Maxime Peyrard, Beatriz Borges, Antoine Bosselut, Robert West, and Boi Faltings. Refiner: Reasoning feedback on intermediate representations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01904 .Project-Numina. Ai-mo/aimo-validation-aime, 2025. URL https://huggingface.co/ datasets/AI-MO/aimo-validation-aime .Xiao Pu, Michael Saxon, Wenyue Hua, and William Yang Wang. Thoughtterminator: Benchmarking, calibrating, and mitigating overthinking in reasoning models, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13367 .Xiaoye Qu, Yafu Li, Zhao-Chen Su, Weigao Sun, Jianhao Yan, Dongrui Liu, Ganqu Cui, Daizong Liu, Shuxian Liang, Junxian He, Peng Li, Wei Wei, Jing Shao, Chaochao Lu, Yue Zhang, Xian-Sheng Hua, Bowen Zhou, and Yu Cheng. A survey of efficient reasoning for large reasoning models: Language, multimodality, and beyond, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.21614 .12 Preprint. Under review. David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q and a benchmark, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022 .Dale Schuurmans, Hanjun Dai, and Francesco Zanini. Autoregressive large language models are computationally universal, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03170 .Yang Sui, Yu-Neng Chuang, Guanchu Wang, Jiamu Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Jiayi Yuan, Hongyi Liu, Andrew Wen, Shaochen Zhong, Na Zou, Hanjie Chen, and Xia Hu. Stop overthinking: A survey on efficient reasoning for large language models, 2025a. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16419 .Yuan Sui, Yufei He, Tri Cao, Simeng Han, Yulin Chen, and Bryan Hooi. Meta-reasoner: Dynamic guidance for optimized inference-time reasoning in large language models, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19918 .Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li, Chenjun Xiao, Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, Chuning Tang, Congcong Wang, Dehao Zhang, Enming Yuan, Enzhe Lu, Fengxiang Tang, Flood Sung, Guangda Wei, Guokun Lai, Haiqing Guo, Han Zhu, Hao Ding, Hao Hu, Hao Yang, Hao Zhang, Haotian Yao, Haotian Zhao, Haoyu Lu, Haoze Li, Haozhen Yu, Hongcheng Gao, Huabin Zheng, Huan Yuan, Jia Chen, Jianhang Guo, Jianlin Su, Jianzhou Wang, Jie Zhao, Jin Zhang, Jingyuan Liu, Junjie Yan, Junyan Wu, Lidong Shi, Ling Ye, Longhui Yu, Mengnan Dong, Neo Zhang, Ningchen Ma, Qiwei Pan, Qucheng Gong, Shaowei Liu, Shengling Ma, Shupeng Wei, Sihan Cao, Siying Huang, Tao Jiang, Weihao Gao, Weimin Xiong, Weiran He, Weixiao Huang, Weixin Xu, Wenhao Wu, Wenyang He, Xianghui Wei, Xianqing Jia, Xingzhe Wu, Xinran Xu, Xinxing Zu, Xinyu Zhou, Xuehai Pan, Y. Charles, Yang Li, Yangyang Hu, Yangyang Liu, Yanru Chen, Yejie Wang, Yibo Liu, Yidao Qin, Yifeng Liu, Ying Yang, Yiping Bao, Yulun Du, Yuxin Wu, Yuzhi Wang, Zaida Zhou, Zhaoji Wang, Zhaowei Li, Zhen Zhu, Zheng Zhang, Zhexu Wang, Zhilin Yang, Zhiqi Huang, Zihao Huang, Ziyao Xu, Zonghan Yang, and Zongyu Lin. Kimi k1.5: Scaling reinforcement learning with llms, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12599 .Qwen Team. Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learning, March 2025. URL 

https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwq-32b/ .Constantin Venhoff, Iv ´an Arcuschin, Philip Torr, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda. Base models know how to reason, thinking models learn when, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2510.07364 .Xi Wang, James McInerney, Lequn Wang, and Nathan Kallus. Entropy after ⟨/Think ⟩ for reasoning model early exiting, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.26522 .Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171 .Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2406.01574 .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large lan-guage models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903 .Heming Xia, Chak Tou Leong, Wenjie Wang, Yongqi Li, and Wenjie Li. Tokenskip: Con-trollable chain-of-thought compression in llms, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502. 12067 .Silei Xu, Wenhao Xie, Lingxiao Zhao, and Pengcheng He. Chain of draft: Thinking faster by writing less, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18600 .13 Preprint. Under review. Chenxu Yang, Qingyi Si, Yongjie Duan, Zheliang Zhu, Chenyu Zhu, Qiaowei Li, Minghui Chen, Zheng Lin, and Weiping Wang. Dynamic early exit in reasoning models, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.15895 .Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601 .Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, Xin Liu, Haibin Lin, Zhiqi Lin, Bole Ma, Guang-ming Sheng, Yuxuan Tong, Chi Zhang, Mofan Zhang, Wang Zhang, Hang Zhu, Jinhua Zhu, Jiaze Chen, Jiangjie Chen, Chengyi Wang, Hongli Yu, Yuxuan Song, Xiangpeng Wei, Hao Zhou, Jingjing Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, Ya-Qin Zhang, Lin Yan, Mu Qiao, Yonghui Wu, and Mingxuan Wang. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14476 .Sheldon Yu, Yuxin Xiong, Junda Wu, Xintong Li, Tong Yu, Xiang Chen, Ritwik Sinha, Jingbo Shang, and Julian McAuley. Explainable chain-of-thought reasoning: An empirical analysis on state-aware reasoning dynamics, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509. 00190 .Eric Zelikman, Georges Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah D. Good-man. Quiet-star: Language models can teach themselves to think before speaking, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.09629 .Anqi Zhang, Yulin Chen, Jane Pan, Chen Zhao, Aurojit Panda, Jinyang Li, and He He. Reasoning models know when they’re right: Probing hidden states for self-verification, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.05419 .Yue Zhang Zhibin Gou. Llm math evaluation harness, 04 2024. URL https://github.com/ ZubinGou/math-evaluation-harness .14 Preprint. Under review. 

# Part I 

# Appendix 

# Table of Contents 

A Limitations and Future Work 16 B Experimental Setup 17 

B.1 Step definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.2 Datasets and Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

C Construction and Validation of the ReasonType taxonomy 18 

C.1 Construction of the taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 C.2 Labeling the reasoning traces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 C.3 Reliability of GPT-4o-mini as an annotator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 C.4 Reason-Type, a robust taxonomy for identifying reasoning behaviors . . . 21 C.5 Generalizability of the ReasonType taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

D Baselines 23 

D.1 Ideal Early-Stopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 D.2 Prompt-guided budget compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 D.3 Token-count budget compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

E Algorithms 29 

E.1 Step-wise Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 E.2 Early Stopping algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 

F Training details of lightweight Step-Tagging module 31 G Influencing factors of the TRACES framework 32 

G.1 Threshold δ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 G.2 Number and Nature of class n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 G.3 Taxonomy used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 G.4 Performance of the Step-Taggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 G.5 Summary of Takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 

H Analysis of the cost of TRACES 41 

H.1 Latency analysis of the Lightweight step-tagging module . . . . . . . . . . 41 H.2 Training-inference cost trade-off . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

I Performance of TRACES 46 

I.1 MATH500 and GSM8K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 I.2 Harder mathematical tasks and beyond mathematical tasks . . . . . . . . . 48 

15 Preprint. Under review. 

A Limitations and Future Work 

Our definition of reasoning step is taken from previous work, and relies on heuristics from the model (generation of “ \n \n” tokens). While adopted by numerous papers in the literature (Lightman et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024), we believe that our step taxonomy can enhance the step definition. Future work should look at leveraging the performance of step-classification to better define reasoning steps. To train accurate Step-Tagger modules, we suspect that significantly increasing the number of traces could lead to better results. Also, down-sampling could render our training more effective, and increase the Macro-F1. In addition, a better definition of a step could lead to more effective monitoring. For instance, it would be interesting to explore dynamic step segmentation. However, current dynamic definitions are expansive (e.g rendering the method gray/black-box and/or increasing the latency). Further, our current TRACES criteria is based on a fixed threshold. Another line of work that could be applied to our setting explored dynamic monitoring of time-series signal. We believe that integrating a dynamic anomaly detection method to our criteria – to better identify when the ratio R drops – could further enhance our early-stopping criteria. 16 Preprint. Under review. 

B Experimental Setup 

B.1 Step definitions 

From the literature, we identified four principal methods to segment the output from a model into distinct thoughts: • Token or sentence level: N ¨aively, thoughts can be decomposed into token (Yao et al., 2023) or sentence level (Fu et al., 2023). However, for complex reasoning problems, these definitions are not ideal since reasoning steps are composed of multiple sentences in mathematical reasoning. • Paragraph level: LLMs and LRMs such as Deepseek-R1, QwQ, or GPT are natively generating back-to-line symbols between two thoughts (e.g. .\n\n). Since this observation is model agnostic, it has been adopted by several works (Cao et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2023). This definition seems to be the most adopted in the current literature. • Dynamic step segmentation: Another common approach is to prompt the model to force the generation of special tokens to split the thoughts (e.g. <next step> ). While some works have used this strategy (Zelikman et al., 2024; Sui et al., 2025b; Paul et al., 2024), it suffers from low reliability and efficiency. Indeed, this approach artificially generates more tokens, and prompt engineering could cause mistakes since models are not pre-trained to perform this sub-task. Furthermore, Liu et al. (2025) suggest a dynamic segmentation based on the model’s entropy. However, this methods often lead to split steps between equations, and requires the model’s internals. • Prompting segmentation: Another approach is to prompt a model to segment its output into steps. Luo et al. (2025b) prompts a model to parse the raw reasoning output into structured steps. Golovneva et al. (2023) prompts the model to generate step-by-step reasoning. Similarly as the previous method, this approach rely on a model to perform the step segmentation. To clearly identify and monitor reasoning steps, the literature does not agree on a consensus regarding the definition of a reasoning step. However, the segmentation using delimiters (e.g. .\n\n) appears to be the well adopted by recent research (Zhang et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2023). For this reason, we adopted the latter definition for our paper. 

B.2 Datasets and Metrics                            

> Domain Ref. Name Train Size Test Size Type of evaluation
> Math-Verify MCQ Prompting Maths Cobbe et al. (2021) GSM8K 3, 000 1, 329 ✓
> Hendrycks et al. (2021) MATH500 1, 000 500 ✓
> Project-Numina (2025) AIME 22-24 30 60 ✓
> In-domain Rein et al. (2023) GPQA-Diamond 40 158 ✓
> Wang et al. (2024) MMLU-Pro 240 1, 200 ✓

Table 1: Overview of selected reasoning datasets and metrics 

Evaluating LRMs. To assess the model’s performance on challenging reasoning tasks, the Avg@ k, Pass@ k, and Cons@ k are common metrics (Chen et al., 2021; 2025a; Yu et al., 2025). The Pass@ k measures the proportion of the samples where at least one of k attempts leads to the correct answer, while the Cons@ k consider a sample correct if all k attempts are correct. Since we are interested about both performance and robustness of our approach, we selected the Avg@5, the Pass@5 and the Cons@5 as the quantitative metrics. Assessing the performance of LRMs on mathematical questions is challenging. This is due to the open nature of the question. For our experiments, we selected the Math-Verify 1 library which is a common metric to assess mathematical problems. It uses text extraction and formal verification. This metric also reported strong correctness compared to other evaluation methods such as Harness (Zhibin Gou, 2024) or Qwen-Math Verifier (Huang et al., 2025). 

> 1

https://github.com/huggingface/Math-Verify 

17 Preprint. Under review. 

C Construction and Validation of the ReasonType taxonomy 

This appendix presents the methodology that we adopted to create the ReasonType tax-onomy. Importantly, this section demonstrates the robustness of our annotation approach using our taxonomy, further validating our overall methodology. 

C.1 Construction of the taxonomy 

In Section 4, we provided a high-level description of our methodology to generate a taxon-omy of reasoning step. In this section, we will describe our methodology in more details. 

Methodology. Our goal in constructing the ReasonType taxonomy is to observe the behavior of LRMs and look at aggregating similar types together to follow the generation of LRMs closely. Because no taxonomy of reasoning steps exists, we used an open-ended labeling procedure: we prompted a model to generate free-form step-type labels, and manually merged common labels together. We took inspiration from previous work, who relied on the summarization and behavior detection capabilities of strong models such as GPT-4o-mini ,as this method has proven to be effective (Galichin et al., 2025; Kuznetsov et al., 2025).         

> Dataset Model # Steps # Unique Tags
> MATH500 DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B 3,840 162
> QwQ-32B 3,057 179

Table 2: Step for taxonomy generation We first generated 100 reasoning traces from the MATH500 train dataset, using  

> DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B

and QwQ-32B , to obtain a pool of reasoning steps (20 samples from each complexity level). We obtained a pool of 6, 897 reasoning steps (see Table 2). Each step is then passed to GPT-4o-mini using our Taxonomy prompt, presented in Figure 7 below. We obtained an open-ended label for each step-type.    

> Taxonomy Prompt
> Below is a reasoning trace of a reasoning language model, split by steps. In these examples, can you please identify the different type of steps? Suggest some reasoning-type labels for each of them. - Step 1: {step 1 }
> -[...]
> - Step t: {step t }

Figure 7: Prompt used to generate the Taxonomy Figure 8 presents the most frequent labels generated. We observe that, even though our prompting was open-ended (without particular instruction for the model to generate certain type of labels), some labels were obtained frequently, such as Problem Identification/Re-Statement , Substitution , or Verification . We manually inspected the labels obtained, and merged labels that have a common signification. Table 3 illustrates several examples. 

Takeaways. While the ReasonType taxonomy might not be optimal, we showed that it reflects the different steps of the model, and offers enough consistency and granularity to analyze the reasoning process of LRMs and to train accurate classifiers for our study. It also echoes previous work, and the categories overlaps with existing taxonomies (Galichin et al., 2025; Marjanovi ´c et al., 2026; Minegishi et al., 2025; Venhoff et al., 2025). Furthermore, the size of our taxonomy (13-14 step-types) is supported by the finding of Venhoff et al. (2025): 

”we find [...] that reasoning mechanisms are reasonably well represented using 10 to 20 categories.” .

Limitations. To over-come the domain dependency, we could rely on the OpenThoughts-114k dataset. Indeed, it seems to provide a diverse set of possible behavior for the models. However, it would come at a high processing cost. 18 Preprint. Under review. 

Figure 8: Most frequent labels obtained from open-end label generation 

Tags from ReasonType DS-Llama8B QwQ-32B 

Problem Re-statement / Setup Problem Re-statement, Problem Identification, Clarification Problem Re-statement, Coordinate Setup, Step-by-Step Breakdown Definition Recall Recall of Relevant Concepts, Definition Recall Recall, Rule Recall, Definition Explanation Formula Substitution Value Substitution, Application of Formula, Calculation Equation Setup, Equation Manipulation, Ap-plication of Formula Exploration Approach Exploration, Exploration of Alter-natives Exploration Self-Talk Procedure Explanation, Plan of Action, Com-parison of Options Confirmation, Reflection, Logical Breakdown Verification Confirmation, Verification Backward Calculation, Example Verification, Assumption Checking Final Answer Final Evaluation, Final Calculation Final Evaluation, Final Calculation 

Table 3: Example of categories from the ReasonType Taxonmy obtained by merging labels from the annotation - each set of labels were generated using our prompt and sampled rea-soning steps, and we manually merged common labels to create the ReasonType taxonomy. 

C.2 Labeling the reasoning traces 

Table 4 presents statistics on the number of steps and GPT-4o-mini annotation for each models on the selected datasets. Results are averaged for the seed 42. 

Model Dataset # Tok. / Steps # Steps / Sample # Steps Runtime / Steps Runtime / Sample Total Runtime 

DS-Llama-8B GSM8K 34.58 23.64 70,911 0.87 20.71 62,143 MATH500 34.11 96.27 96,270 0.88 84.86 84,861 

DS-Qwen-14B 

GSM8K 36.64 14.01 42,017 0.86 12.09 36,293 MATH500 34.33 94.84 94,838 0.85 80.26 80,263 AIME 22-24 27.74 469.29 42,236 0.85 398.68 35,881 GPQA-Diamond 38.96 186.51 36,928 0.84 156.05 30,898 MMLU-Pro 35.86 64.59 90,428 0.87 56.42 78,985 

QwQ-32B GSM8K 45.59 40.43 121,288 0.87 35.33 105,977 MATH500 38.97 117.28 117,283 0.83 97.49 97,494 

Table 4: Avg. # of steps and annotation runtime per sample - MATH500 and GSM8K are the trained dataset (1, 000 and 3, 000 samples, respectively). AIME, GPQA and MMLU are the full dataset (90, 198 and 1, 400 samples, respectively). Runtime in seconds. 19 Preprint. Under review. 

C.3 Reliability of GPT-4o-mini as an annotator Claim. Our framework rely on the annotation capability of the GPT-4o-mini model. Since the model is large and achieved great performance on a range of tasks, we assumed that the model is able to provide us with labels of good quality. In this section, we will observe and analyse the reliability of the annotation of the steps by the GPT-4o-mini model. 

Methodology. To verify our claim, we sampled 1, 000 reasoning steps of DS-Qwen14B model from its inference on the MATH500 dataset. We then annotated each steps 5 times using GPT-4o-mini , and observe the agreement of each annotation. In addition, we also compared the annotation agreement between the GPT-4o-mini model, and 3 ad-ditional models: GPT-4o (a larger, closed-source model), llama-3-3-70b-instruct , and 

Mixtral-8x22B-Instruct-v0.1 (both open-source and smaller relatively to the two model selected). This setup allows us to assess both the internal consistency of GPT-4o-mini and its alignment with other model annotators. 

Experimental Design. We refer to self-model agreement as the Inner-model agreement 

(agreement between different runs of the same model on the same reasoning steps). The inner-model agreement is measured using the Fleiss’ kappa metric. Indeed, the Fleiss’ kappa measure the agreement between more than 2 annotators, making it suitable to compare many annotation trials (Moons & Vandervieren, 2025). Furthermore, we call agreement between two different model the Inter-model agreement . To compute this, we first selected the most consistent label generated across the different runs for each model, and we measured the Cohen’s Kappa (Badshah & Sajjad, 2025). For this experiment, we used the OpenAI default decoding parameters for the GPT models (temperature = 1.0 and top-p = 1.0). Same parameter was set for the other models selected.               

> Models GPT-4o-mini GPT-4o Llama-3-3-70b Mixtral-8x22B GPT-4o-mini 0.780 0.601 0.457 0.392 GPT-4o 0.799 0.445 0.384 Llama-3-3-70b 0.722 0.398 Mixtral-8x22B 0.587

Table 5: Agregation metrics of the annotation process - 1, 000 samples reasoning steps from the DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B model on the MATH500 dataset - Fleiss’ kappa in bold (diagonal - inner-model aggregation) - Cohen’s kappa otherwise (inter-model aggregation) 

Internal consistency of GPT-4o-mini . The Fleiss’ Kappa score of 0.780 (see Table 5 in the diagonal) indicates high agreement among multiple independent runs of GPT-4o-mini on the same reasoning steps. This demonstrates that the model produces stable and consistent annotations when prompted repeatedly. We observe that the Fleiss’ Kappa score seems to decrease as the model size becomes smaller. 

GPT-4o-mini against other models. When comparing GPT-4o-mini with other models, we observe significant agreement with GPT-4o , with a Cohen’s Kappa of 0.601, and moderate agreement with smaller models (0.457 with Llama70b and 0.392 with Mixtral). The higher agreement with GPT-4o suggests that larger models tend to produce more stable and higher-quality annotation, while smaller models exhibits more variability. 

Takeaway. Overall, these results supports that GPT-4o-mini is a reliable annotator for reasoning steps. Indeed, for our annotation task, the model appears to be consistent accross multiple runs, and shows meaningful agreement with other strong models. The results obtained on smaller models confirms our decision of selecting GPT-4o-mini as a annotator to label the reasoning steps of LRMs. 20 Preprint. Under review. 

C.4 Reason-Type, a robust taxonomy for identifying reasoning behaviors Objective. This ablation study is looking at further validating our ReasonType taxonomy. In other words, we are investigating whether our proposed taxonomy captures meaningful distinctions in reasoning steps. We are looking to demonstrate that: 1. The ReasonType taxonomy enable semantic distinction of the type of reasoning. 2. Our annotation method with the GPT-4o-mini model, coupled with the ReasonType taxonomy, is a robust method to access to the ground-truth labels of the reasoning steps. 

Methodology. To address our objective, we compare the performance of BERT classifiers across Original labels (OG - from GPT-4o-mini annotation using the ReasonType taxonomy), and shuffled labels for three step-types, namely: Verification , Exploration and Self-Talk . For the shuffled labels version, we took the exact same proportion of positive labels as in Original datasets, and used random shuffle with a seed of 42. Each experiment is run on the same training and held-out testing dataset (see Section 6), using the MATH500 training dataset on the DS-Qwen14B model. Instead of training Step-Tagging classifiers (identifying 3-classes, including constructive and evaluative classes), we trained binary step-taggers following the same training configuration (see Appendix F). We set the label of selected class to 1, and put other labels to 0. To compare performances, we report both training loss, and classification metrics (precision and recall on both classes, along with macro and micro average.) 

Evaluation. Figure 9 shows the train-ing loss of the Original and Shuf-fled versions, for the three labels. Models trained on the Original labels presents significant lower losses, and are smoothly decreasing. It demon-strate that the Original datasets con-tains meaningful patterns between reasoning steps and their labels. In comparison, the models trained on shuffled labels present almost con-stant loss, relatively higher than the one from the Original labels. Figure 9: Training losses - ReasonType vs. Shuffled labels 

Furthermore, Figures 10a and 10b show the Precision and Recall classification metrics on the testing dataset, respectively. For Original runs, both classes (0 and 1) achieve good performance despite dataset imbalancity, with Macro average Precision and Recall lying between 0.76 and 0.90 across labels. In comparison, shuffled runs presents poor results, with models failing in predicting positive classes - Precision and Recall of class 1 between 0.00 and 0.06. Along with the training loss, theses metrics highlight that the models trained on shuffles labels cannot learn meaningful relations between steps and labels. In comparison, Original labels (from the ReasonType taxonomy) resulted in satisfying model performance, and smooth training.  

> (a) Precision (b) Recall

Figure 10: Precision and Recall - ReasonType vs. Shuffled labels 

Takeaway. Overall, these results comforts our finding that the ReasonType taxonomy labels enable annotation methods to results in reasoning steps carrying semantic meaning. 21 Preprint. Under review. 

C.5 Generalizability of the ReasonType taxonomy 

We proved in Appendix C.3 that GPT-4o-mini is a reliable annotator model for our taxonomy and the task of tagging the steps. However, the taxonomy is generated from specific samples of specific models. We already proved to some extend that the Taxonomy is generalizable. Indeed, we trained our step-tagging classifier on reasoning steps obtained using DS-Qwen14B, a model that was not used to derive the taxonomy (see Appendix C.1). Moreover, we obtained satisfying performance of our step-tagging classifier on models and datasets that were not used to for training, namely DS-Llama8B and QwQ-32B on MATH500 and GSM8K, and DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K, AIME and MMLU-Pro (see Section 6). 

Claim. To further validate our taxonomy, we will test its applicability to 2 additional reasoning models. Our claim is that if the annotation process from GPT-4o-mini results in accurate training of step-tagging classifiers, it means that the ReasonType taxonomy is applicable to other models, therefore generalizable. To evaluate this, we trained binary BERT classifiers – similarly as Appendix C.4 – on four step-types, namely: Problem Re-statement ,

Exploration , Self-Talk and Verification .

Methodology. To verify our claim, we inferred 2 additional models on both MATH500 and GSM8K, specifically microsoft/Phi-4-reasoning and Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Thinking-2507 

since they are both reasoning models, and comes from additional providers or training methods. We then trained 4 BERT classifiers for each model and dataset. We used 500 and 3, 000 samples from the MATH500 and GSM8K train datasets, respectively. 

Performances of the Step-Taggers. We split the resulting annotated datasets following random 80:20 train/test split. Figure 11a and 11b show the micro-F1 and macro-F1 for the Phi-4 and Qwen3-30B-A3B models on MATH500 and GSM8K, respectively. We observe satifying performances of Step-Taggers on both models. Specifically, on the Phi-4 model, we obtained between 0.7 to 0.98 and 0.63 to 0.87 macro-F1 on MATH500 and GSM8K datasets, respectively. The lower macro-F1 on Exploration can be explained by its low representation in the datasets (around 1% of labels in both datasets). Similarly, Qwen3-30B-A3B obtained satifying perfromance on both MATH500 and GSM8K, with 0.72 to 0.84 and 0.76 to 0.90 macro-F1, respectively. Performances of both models are comparable to results obtained on the DS-Qwen14B using the original dataset (see Appendix C.4).  

> (a) Phi-4 (b) Qwen3-30B-A3B

Figure 11: Performance of Step-Taggers - seed 42 

Takeaways. We interpret the satisfying performances of the Step-Taggers trained on other models as further validating the applicability of our taxonomy to other models. Indeed, these models were not used to create our ReasonType taxonomy, but still resulted in step-type identification performance of BERT classifiers trained on their reasoning traces using our methodology. 22 Preprint. Under review. 

D Baselines 

D.1 Ideal Early-Stopping Algorithm. Algorithm 1 presents the Ideal Early-Stopping IE S baseline algorithm. 

Algorithm 1 Ideal Early-Stopping IE S 

Require: Prompt x; reasoning delimiter α ∈ V; Ground-Truth Answer ygold ; Answer checker 

β(prediction, ground truth ); Reasoning Language Model M; tokenizer T ; EOS token γ;1: y ← T (x) ▷ Tokenize the input 2: Srunning ← [ ] ; ▷ Initialize output 3: t ← 04: b ← True ▷ Initialize stopping criteria 5: while b do ▷ Generate until constraint breaks 6: Generate step si using M and α

7: y ← si

8: ycurrent answer ← P exit (y) ▷ Retrieve the current best answer 9: if β(ycurrent answer , ygold ) then 

10: b ← False ▷ Stop generation 11: else 

12: Continue the generation until EOS token 13: end if 

14: t ← t + 115: end while 

16: return y

SIES in practice. Figure 12 shows the distribution of the IES step SIES obtained by applying Algorithm 1 to the traces obtained on the training datasets. 

(a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K 

(d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500 

(g) DS-Qwen14B on AIME (h) DS-Qwen14B on GPQA (i) DS-Qwen14B on MMLU-Pro 

Figure 12: IES on training datasets - correct answers 23 Preprint. Under review. 

Further evidences of reasoning transition phase. In Section 4, we detail that our IES algorithm. In practice, we prompted back the model after each steps to retrieve its current best answer. While this process is expansive (models often generate hundreds of steps for complex problems), it gives us access the model’s best answer after each step that is being generated. In Section 5, we observe that our ratio R drops around the SIES step. By the nature of the classes τconstructive and τevaluative , we interpreted the drop of R as a reasoning phase transition. We concluded that before that phase, the model constructed its answer, and past this phase, the model verified its current answer. While it is an observation of the model’s behaviors (type of reasoning), we miss an obser-vation of the model’s state with regards to its current answer. Figure 13 address this, and show how frequently the model’s current best answer changes through the reasoning. To plot such figures, we inspect the content in the ” \boxed {. . . }” answer between consecutive steps. Indeed, we prompted back the model forcing the model to include a ” \boxed {. . . }”in its answer generation for each step. If the content is different between two consecutive steps, we interpret that the model switched its current best answer.     

> (a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K
> (d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500

Figure 13: Switch rate of model’s answer on training datasets - si ∈ Sbefore and si ∈ Safter in blue and red bars, respectively We define the switch rate as the proportion of sample in the dataset including a switch between consecutive steps at a particular step index. We observe that before the IES step, the model switches its current answer frequently. After the IES step, we observe that the model stabilizes, and conserves its current answer. 24 Preprint. Under review. 

Answer correctness before and after IES step. Furthermore, we want to analyze how the correctness propagates through the reasoning. Such information could be useful to better understand how to manage the reasoning process and when to early-stop. Figure 14 shows the correctness of the model through its reasoning. Instead of monitoring how frequent the model switches its answer, we evaluated the ” \boxed {. . . }” generated, at each step, with the ground-truth.     

> (a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K
> (d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500

Figure 14: Answer correctness on training datasets On Figure 14, we observe an accuracy of 0 before the IES step ( x = 0). This is expected, since the IES step is the first time where the model reaches a correct answer. Furthermore, the correctness peak at the IES step, and then drops. This can be attributed to the fact that after the IES, the model still switches its answer. Figure 13 and 14 partially explains why early-stopping is a hard problem. After the IES step, the model switches its answer less frequently, but still does. It means that sometimes the model reached the correct answer (IES), but move away from it time to time (and it seems to be caused by the self-verification/validation of the model – see Section 5, where we concluded that the reasoning behavior of LRMs is often dominated by Evaluative steps). So if a sample early-stop after the IES step and before the end of the CoT, the TRACES algorithm sometimes early-stops with the wrong answer (explaining why we have minimal drop in the accuracy for moderated values of δ). 25 Preprint. Under review. 

D.2 Prompt-guided budget compression 

Prompt Baselines Pguided 

User Prompt - P (0)

> user

User Prompt: Please do not reason extensively, be succinct, and put your final answer within boxed {} . {question }

System Prompt P (0)

> system

System Prompt: Respond concisely and confidently. Skip validations and over-verification steps. 

User Prompt: {question }

System Prompt - P (1)

> system

System Prompt: Respond concisely and confidently. Skip validations and over-verification steps. Here is an examples: Example 1: {FS 1 }

User Prompt: {question }

System Prompt - P (3)

> system

System Prompt: Respond concisely and confidently. Skip validations and over-verification steps. Here are some examples: Example 1: {FS 1 }

Example 2: {FS 2 } Example 3: {FS 3 }

User Prompt: {question }

Example 1 - Verification step 

Wait, let me double-check. If I plug in x = −3 into the denominator, (−3)2 + ( −3) − 6 = 9 − 3 − 6 = 0. Yep, that works. For x = 2 : 22 + 2 − 6 =

4 + 2 − 6 = 0. Correct. So both roots are valid. 

Example 2 - Verification step 

Therefore, the graph of y = 2(x2 + x − 6) has vertical asymptotes at x = −3 and x = 2, so that’s two vertical asymptotes. I don’t think there’s any chance that I made a mistake here, but maybe I should check by graphing the function or plugging in values close to −3 and 2 to see if the function does go to infinity. 

Example 3 - Verification step 

Another test with n = 3. Let’s compute manually. All non-empty subsets: Single elements: {1}, {2}, {3} with sums 1,2,3. Pairs: {1,2 } →

2 − 1 = 1 {1,3 } → 3 − 1 = 2 {2,3 } → 3 − 2 = 1. Triple: {1,2,3 } → 3 − 2 + 1 = 2. Total sum: 1 + 2 + 3 + 1 + 2 + 1 + 2 = 12. Using the formula: contributions from each k : k = 3: 3 ∗ 22 ∗ 1 = 3 ∗ 4 = 12. k = 1 and k = 2 contribute 0. So total sum 12, which matches. 

Figure 15: Prompt baselines 26 Preprint. Under review. 

D.3 Token-count budget compression Motivation. In Section 2, we framed our contributions and within existing gaps in the literature. Specifically, a motivation of our work is that existing early-stopping methods are either fixed (the early-stopping is fixed before the inference, using prompt-compression or token-count budgets) or dynamic (the stopping decision is taken during the inference, based on the model’s internals). First, most existing dynamic methods are gray/white box. Indeed, Yang et al. (2025); Wang et al. (2025) rely on the logits or on the model’s internals which reduces the applicability of early-stopping mechanisms. In comparison, our approach is black-box since it only relies the text generated by the CoT (which is the case for certain APIs such as Ollama, or closed-source models - those models does not gives the user access to the model’s internal). Second, in Section 4, we introduced the Pguided baselines, inspired by the related work (Lee et al., 2025). While these baselines enable a fair comparison (black-box early-stopping), it does not allow a comparison at equivalent token-count. For this reason, this ablation further evaluate our TRACES framework in comparison to Ttoken-count token-count baselines (Pu et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025). Indeed, Ttoken-count baselines allows us to target a specific token-count when early-stopping the generation. 

Claim. In this section, we argue that TRACES is competitive against Ttoken-count baselines. Furthermore, we show that it also offers as much control over the generation as managing the token-count, and does not requires previous knowledge for a given model or dataset. In other words, TRACES is more agnostic to the models and datasets used than the baselines. 

Methodology. To implement Ttoken-count , we stop the generation of the LRMs early, based on fixed token-budget. The token-count of LRMs depends on the model and datasets. For this reason, to build effective Ttoken-count methods, the literature showed that a calibration analysis is required before-hand (Pu et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025). To calibrate our token-count baseline effectively, we assume to have access to the average token-count over samples for a given model and dataset.       

> (a) GSM8K - DS-8B (b) GSM8K - DS-14B (c) GSM8K - QwQ-32B
> (d) MATH500 - DS-8B (e) MATH500 - DS-14B (f) MATH500 - QwQ-32B
> (g) AIME - DS-14B (h) GPQA - DS-14B (i) MMLU - DS-14B

Figure 16: Distribution of Token-count on training datasets 27 Preprint. Under review. 

Selecting the token-budget. The average token-count budget is useful to know the compu-tation efforts needed by a model for a given dataset (without intervention in the generation). However, the token-count is volatile across the samples, and depends on both models and datasets. Figure 16 shows the distribution of token-count on training datasets. We observe that the token-count is variable across samples of a same dataset. To make our 

Ttoken-count baseline simple yet effective, we suggest to fix the token-budget proportionally to the average token-count of models and datasets combination. Namely, we stop the generation early if the token-count exceed η = α × μmodel, dataset , where η is the token-count limit, μmodel, dataset the average token-count for a given model and dataset, and α is a factor that varies. For our experimentation, we select α ∈ [0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0 ]. These various values allows to set budgets around the value of the average token-count. In Figure 16, the red vertical dotted lines represents the different Ttoken-count that we selected. 

Ttoken-count baselines. Figure 17 shows the performance of TRACES compared to the 

Ttoken-count baselines. First, we observe that our design of Ttoken-count enable a fair com-parison of TRACES at equivalent token-count. Indeed, we observe most TRACES config-urations has a baseline which has approximately a similar token-count. Second, we see that the performance of TRACES configurations matches closely to the performance of the 

Ttoken-count baselines. Indeed, many TRACES configurations lies on the Pareto front, and when Ttoken-count outperforms TRACES at same token-count, it is by a maximum of 2% to 4% accuracy. These results shows that our TRACES method matches token-count baseline, without requiring information on the computation efforts required by a model on a dataset.       

> (a) GSM8K - DS-8B (b) GSM8K - DS-14B (c) GSM8K - QwQ-32B
> (d) MATH500 - DS-8B (e) MATH500 - DS-14B (f) MATH500 - QwQ-32B
> (g) AIME - DS-14B (h) GPQA - DS-14B (i) MMLU - DS-14B

Figure 17: TRACES vs. Token-count Ttoken-count baseline - Pass@1 

Takeaways. In this section, we compared TRACES to an additional common approach in the literature, namely: token-budgeting methods. We showed that TRACES matches closely the performance of token-count baselines. Importantly, TRACES does not requires previous knowledge from the configurations (token-count specific to models and datasets). 28 Preprint. Under review. 

E Algorithms 

E.1 Step-wise Generation 

To generate the reasoning traces of models step-by-step, we need to modify the 

model.generate function from Hugging Face. However, this process comes at the cost of latency in model generation since we need to interrupt the generation process at each step. The algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. 

Algorithm 2 Step-wise Generation 

Require: Prompt x; reasoning delimiter α ∈ V; max steps Tmax ; language model M; tokenizer T ;EOS token 1: y ← T (x) ▷ Tokenized input 2: S ← [ ] ; β ← ∅ ▷ Initialize output and buffer 3: s ← 04: while s < Tmax do 

5: t ← M (y) ▷ Generate next token 6: y ← y + t

7: β ← β + T −1(t) ▷ Add decoded token to buffer 8: if EOS in y then ▷ Stop inference if EOS generated 9: Append β to S

10: break 

11: end if 

12: if β ends with α then ▷ Complete and valid step 13: Append β to S

14: β ←′′ ▷ Empty the buffer 15: s ← s + 1 ▷ Increase S by one step 16: else 

17: Continue ▷ Continue until next α or EOS is generated 18: end if 

19: end while 

20: return S

29 Preprint. Under review. 

E.2 Early Stopping algorithm 

Algorithm 3 lists the TRACES criteria. The user needs to define a constraint δ, and input a Step-Tagger module ϕτ∗ , which returns 1, 2 and 0 if the step tag is τconstructive , τevaluative ,or τother (of another type), respectively. If the constraint breaks, the algorithm stops the generation, and prompts the model with Pexit to give the current best answer. Note that we added a fixed condition w on top of cτ∗(Srunning , δ). It makes our condition robust with regards to possible fluctuations during the monitoring. Indeed, this additional condition ensures that we stop only when the value of the ratio Ri is lower than δ for w = 5consecutive steps (validating that the model entered a reasoning phase transition). 

Algorithm 3 TRACES 

Require: Prompt x; reasoning delimiter α ∈ V; Reasoning Language Model M; tokenizer T ; EOS token γ; Constraint {δ, w = 5}; Step-Tagger ϕτ∗ ; Early-Exit Prompt Pexit 

1: y ← T (x) ▷ Tokenize the input 2: Srunning ← [ ] ; ▷ Initialize output 3: t ← 04: fτconstructive , fτevaluative ← 0, 0 ▷ Initialize frequency track of τconstructive and τevaluative 

5: while cτ∗(Srunning , δ) do ▷ Generate until constraint breaks 6: Generate step si using M and α

7: y ← si

8: τi ← ϕτ∗ (si ) ▷ Step-Tagging prediction 9: if τi ∈ τconstructive then 

10: fconstr ← fconstr + 111: else if τi ∈ τevaluative then 

12: feval ← feval + 113: end if 

14: if fconstr + feval = 0 then 

15: R ← 116: else 

17: R ← fconstr    

> fconstr +feval

▷ Compute R

18: end if 

19: if R < δ then 

20: Append 1 to F ▷ Flag sequence 21: else 

22: Append 0 to F

23: end if 

24: if ∑ F[−w:] = w then 

25: break ▷ Trigger early stopping when R < δ for w = 5 consecutive steps 26: end if 

27: t ← t + 128: end while 

29: y ← M (y + Pexit ) ▷ Infer M with the early exit prompt 30: return y

30 Preprint. Under review. 

F Training details of lightweight Step-Tagging module 

Experimental Design. We selected the bert-base-uncased sentence classifier (Devlin et al., 2019) to construct our Step-Tagging framework, including a single hidden layer. Given the large and fine-grained nature of our taxonomy (13 distinct step types), training a multi-class classifier is challenging due to significant class imbalance. To address this, we trained a sentence classifier to identify separately 3 classes of steps. Our classifier is trained to assign to steps the tag 1 and 2 for step-types in the classes τconstructive and τevaluative , respectively. Our classifier also assigns the label 0 for any other step-types – such steps does not affects our ratio R. This approach notably improved detection accuracy across low-frequency categories, and fits our definition of early-stopping constraint: detecting constructive and 

evaluative step-type to estimate the ratio R.

Training details. Figure 18a and 18b present the training loss and validation accuracy, respectively. We trained our classifier for 15 epochs. The batch size is 16 and we used an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 2.10 −5. To evaluate the performance of our classifiers, we computed the Macro-F1 and Micro-F1 on the test datasets. While the Macro-F1 

helps to identify the classifier’s ability to detect rare classes, the Micro-F1 offers a more global view on the step detector’s performance across all steps.  

> (a) Training loss (b) Validation accuracy

Figure 18: Training metrics - Step-Tagging module 31 Preprint. Under review. 

G Influencing factors of the TRACES framework 

In this Section, we inspect the influence of the parameters of our approach. While we showed in Section 6 that our approach seems to generalize well across various models and datasets, we inspect the robustness of our methods across its parameters. 

G.1 Threshold δ

We compared in Section 6 the performance of our TRACES Early-Stopping criteria. We showed that the value of the threshold can allow adaptive computation at inference time. Figure 19 present the efficiency trade-off of our criteria based on the value of the thresholds 

δ, on GSM8K and MATH500 across all selected models.  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 19: Efficiency trade-off against threshold δ over the three selected LRMs In Figure 19, we observe that reducing the token-count agressively on GSM8K has generally less impact on the model’s accuracy than on MATH500. Indeed, we observe for same token-count saving proportion (50%) the accuracy drop is around 4.5% vs. 17% for GSM8K and MATH500, respectively (with δ = 0.9 and δ = 0.7, respectively). First, MATH500 results in higher token-count. It means that for the same proportion, TRACES prune more tokens on MATH500 than on GSM8K. And the validation phase often represents a high proportion on higher token-count datasets (see Figure 12 in Section D.1). Together, it explains why datasets resulting in higher token-count results in higher token-count saving with high value of δ.Second, we observe that early-exiting is a harder problem for complex datasets (e.g. MATH500 compared to GSM8K). Indeed, we observe in Figure 14 in Appendix D.1 that the answer correctness is more variable on MATH500 than on GSM8K – from the IES step to the end of the generation. This observation also contributes to justify why we are observing higher accuracy drop on MATH500 than GSM8K 

Takeaways: Together, the observations made in this section supports the fact that TRACES is more sensible on harder reasoning tasks. While TRACES is flexible ( δ can be used to target a wide range of token-count saving), high values of δ on problems requiring high number of tokens can result in aggressive token-count saving at the cost of the accuracy. This can be mitigated by setting lower values of δ, still achieving reasonable token-count saving with minimal accuracy drop. As well, this observation supports that complex reasoning problems needs more evaluative steps to conserve a good accuracy. 32 Preprint. Under review. 

G.2 Number and Nature of class n

Objective. In this subsection, we assess how robust our criteria is with regards to the step-type classes to compute our ratio R. We have seen in Section 5 that τconstructive =

{τProblem-Restatement , τDefinition Recall } and τevaluative = {τVerification , τFinal Conclusion } are com-mon across models and datasets. Furthermore, the ratio R plot on training datasets, as well as the evaluation Sections 5 and 6 show that our fixed reasoning transition classes lead to good performance. This ablation is comparing our methodology and framework against different selections of tags.                                  

> # of tags Config. τconstructive τevaluative
> PB Restat Def Recall Context Rep Verif Final Concl Alt App
> 1
> 1✓✓
> 2✓✓
> 3✓✓
> 2
> 4✓✓✓✓
> 5✓✓✓✓
> 6✓✓✓✓
> 37✓✓✓✓✓✓

Table 6: Alternative reasoning transition classes 

Alternative Reasoning Transition classes. Table 6 present alternative reasoning transition sets of step-types that we use to compute the ratio R. We suggest configurations including 1, 2, and 3 step-types per class. To allow fair comparison, we mix different configurations of classes. We conduct this ablation on the DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B model, on both GSM8K and MATH500 train datasets. Given our results from the main body of the paper, we expect to obtain similar results on other datasets and models. 

(a) GSM8K 

(b) MATH500 

Figure 20: Ratio R for different reasoning transition classes 33 Preprint. Under review. 

Reasoning transition. Figure 20 shows the ratio R for each configurations presented for GSM8K and MATH500 train. First, we observe that some ratios are poorly adapted to observe a reasoning transition. Indeed, configurations 3 and 6 lead to a drop of the ratio before the IES step (i.e. x = 0). This is due to the distribution observed. Indeed, the class 

Alternative Exploration is almost balanced between before and after IES step. It means that these steps appears before IES, decreasing the value of R per its definition. Conversely, configurations 2, 3 and 6 obtained higher value of R after IES, implying a less pronounced reasoning transition phase. Specifically, these configurations includes Context Repetition but excludes Problem Re-statement . The delta ∆before-after of Context Repetition is lower than the one from Problem Re-statement , meaning that some Context Repetition appears more frequently after IES, increasing the value of R.The same observation holds for the MATH500 dataset. Overall, we observe that configura-tions including Problem Re-statement , Verification and/or Final Conclusion result in similar curves: almost constant ratio R before the IES, and then drops after. 

TRACES Early-Stopping. Figure 21 presents the TRACES of the various configurations. We observe that it aligns with Figure 20. Configurations with ratio R dropping before IES stops the generation early, at the cost of the accuracy. All the other configurations lead to similar behavior, confirming our selection.  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 21: TRACES performance 

Takeaways. To conclude, we observed that the choice of the selected step-types affects the quality of the reasoning transition signal, and by extension, the performance of the TRACES framework. First, not all the step-types are equally informative. Classes such as Alternative Exploration or Context Repetition exhibits more balanced distribution before and after IES, making them poorly informative of the reasoning transition. Furthermore, more classes seems to add noise in the signal, diluting the imbalancity of classes. 34 Preprint. Under review. 

G.3 Taxonomy used Objective. In this ablation study, we assess how robust our taxonomy is for the TRACES criteria. To do so, we run the same experiment that we conducted in the main body of the paper on different alternative versions of our original taxonomy. 

Alternative Taxonomies. Our original taxonomy is wide and fine-grained, containing 13 categories of labels (excluding the placeholder label “Other”). Therefore, we reduce the number of labels in the taxonomy, and grouped similar labels at different levels of abstraction. Table 7 shows resulting the taxonomies, considering from 13, 6, 4, 3, and 2 labels. A binary label represent the simplest form of constraint, where we only identify τconstructive 

or τevaluative setp-types.              

> Tags ids 6-labels 4-labels 3-labels 2-label Problem Re-Statement Setup Early Reasoning Early Reasoning Early Reasoning
> Context Repetition
> Definition Re-call
> Formula Substitution Manipulation Mid Reasoning Mid Reasoning Symbolic Transformation Edge Case Analysis Pattern Recognition Exploration Meta Reasoning
> Late Reasoning Late Reasoning Late Reasoning
> Interpretation Self-Talk
> Verification Checking
> Heuristic / Intuition
> Final Conclusion End Reasoning End Reasoning

Table 7: Alternative taxonomies - we regrouped labels at different levels of abstraction to observe the impact of the taxonomy on the TRACES early-stopping criteria 

Methodology. To address our objective, we performed the same analysis presented in Section 5, using the different taxonomies (i.e. vocabulary of tags T ). For each taxonomies, the experiment resulted in Category distributions Sbefore and Safter . For each models, we re-used the MATH500 and GSM8K training datasets labeled by GPT-4o-mini using our methodology explicated in Section 5. We then merged labels as in Table 7. 

Distribution of labels around SIES . Figure 22 presents the distribution of the tags for Sbefore 

and Safter (orange and blue bars, respectively). We note that for some labels, merging tags together in higher level classes enphasis the difference in distribution between tags before and after SIES .For each alternative taxonomies, we selected specific τconstructive and τalternative to compute the ratio R. Specifically, we set τconstructive to Setup , and Early Reasoning for labels 6 and 4, 3, 2, respectively. Similarly, we set τevaluative to Checking , and Late Reasoning for labels 6 and 4, 3, 2, respectively. Selected tags for each categories are highlighted in bold in Table 7. 35 Preprint. Under review.      

> (a) Original - GSM8K (b) Original - MATH500
> (c) 6-labels - GSM8K (d) 6-labels - MATH500
> (e) 4-labels - GSM8K (f) 4-labels - MATH500
> (g) 3-labels - GSM8K (h) 3-labels - MATH500
> (i) 2-labels - GSM8K (j) 2-labels - MATH500

Figure 22: Distribution of labels around SIES - Alternative taxonomies on DS-Llama8B 

Ratio R for each taxonomy. Figure 23 presents the ratio for the different alternative tax-onomies. Across both GSM8K and MATH500 datasets, we observe a that transition pattern is common over the different levels of abstractions. Before SIES , the ratio remains relatively high, indicating that constructive steps dominates the reasoning process. After SIES , the ratio drops sharply, reflecting an increasing proportion of evaluative steps. 36 Preprint. Under review. 

> (a) GSM8K
> (b) MATH500

Figure 23: Ratio R for different taxonomies - DS-Llama8B It is worth noting that the magnitude of R before SIES is lower for labels 4 and 3, and the drop is less pronounced for 2-labels after SIES . In comparison, R is higher and its drop is cleaner for Original and 6-labels taxonomies. 

TRACES performance per taxonomy. Figure 24 compares the TRACES performance ob-tained using the different taxonomies. The Pareto curves, illustrating the token-count usage and the accuracy, remain very similar across taxonomies for both GSM8K and MATH500. The original and the 6-labels taxonomies achieve slightly better trade-offs, providing higher accuracy for the for the same token budget. However, the performance degradation is minimal for higher-level taxonomies. This suggests that TRACES does not rely highly on fine-grained reasoning distinctions to identify the reasoning transition.  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 24: TRACES performance against alternative taxonomies - DS-Llama8B 

Takeaways. To conclude, we observe that the reasoning transition pattern remains robust across different level of granularity of the taxonomy. While finer-grained taxonomies seem to enable cleaner signal, all taxonomies resulted in equivalent TRACES performances. 37 Preprint. Under review. 

G.4 Performance of the Step-Taggers Objective. In this ablation study, we assess how robust our framework is with regards to the Step-Tagging lightweight module. To do so, we run the experiment that we conducted on different expected performance of the Step-Tagging module. 

Motivation. Even though we obtained satisfying performances, it remains unclear how the performance of the BERT classifiers affects the inference outcomes. To mitigate this limitation, this section looks at how tagging errors affects the efficiency performance of our TRACES framework. 

Claim. The goal of our Step-Tagger module is to assign each step one of the following 3 tag: 0 - neural, 1 - constructive and 2 - evaluative. An inaccurate step-tagger would miss to identify the correct class. Intuitively, such errors in the classifications would result in rendering the monitoring process noisy. Indeed, our approach is based on the observation that constructive classes appears more frequently before the IES step, and evaluative classes after. We claim that an inaccurate step-tagger would therefore degrade the identification of the reasoning transition phase. 

Methodology. To verify such claim, we selected the DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B model, on GSM8K and MATH500 train. As we conducted the same methodology on other models, we expect similar results for other models. 

Proportional performance: To ground our analysis more realistically, we introduce a proportionally accurate tagging module, that would get prediction correct following the ground-truth label distribution (from GPT-4o-mini annotation process). Indeed, step-types have different distributions, so a balanced tagging module would disproportionally impact the overall metric. We defined 10 target accuracy from the router, from 0.10 to 1.00 micro-F1, with a path of 0.10. Figure 25 describes the strategy we adopted for both datasets, along with the original router accuracy (see Figure 5 in Section 6).  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 25: Simulated performance of the BERT classifiers 

Distribution before after based on expected router accuracy. First, we evaluate the distribu-tion of tags generated by the BERT classifiers, before and after the IES step. Figure 26 shows the average proportion of the three classes (0 - neutral, 1 - constructive, and 2 - evaluative) against the simulated module’s performance. We observe that as the tagger’s performance degrades to smaller values of accuracy, the proportion curves converges towards equivalent values. It means that the tagger’s performance affects its capacity to identify the pattern that we observed in Section 5 (unbalanced distribution of specific classes depending on the state of the reasoning - before or after the IES step). 

Ratio R based on expected router accuracy. Figure 27 shows the ratio R for the different values of performance of our tagger module. The Figure confirms our observation from the distribution (Figure 26). As the performance of the Step-Tagger module degrades, the ratio becomes noisy, and the transition phase is less sharp. This is due to the distribution of tags itself. Indeed, we observed in Figure 26 that for inaccurate modules (F1 < 0.4), the distributions of each class before and after the IES step is comparable, and so the resulting ratio is almost constant, without drop after the IES. 38 Preprint. Under review.  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 26: Distribution Sbefore and Safter against step-tagger’s performance  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 27: Ratio R against the step-tagger’s performance 

TRACES based on expected router accuracy. On the strenght of our analysis, we applied the classifiers to our TRACES framework. Each curve represent the TRACES obtained for different level of performance of the step-taggers. We note that the ground-truth obtained the best performance (forming a Pareto front - best accuracy for a given token-count). As the router’s performance degrades, the accuracy of TRACES drops.  

> (a) GSM8K (b) MATH500

Figure 28: TRACES against the step-tagger’s performance 

Takeaways. Overall, we confirm our claims. When the Step-Tagging module performs poorly (F1 < 0.4), the distribution of tags before and after IES becomes undistinguishable. As a consequence, the ratio R loses its drop at the IES step and no transition phase is observable. It makes it harder to identify the correct step to early-stop. However, beyond a certain threshold (F1 > 0.7), the TRACES curves remain close to the ground-truth Pareto front, suggesting that the framework is robust to minor tag errors. This is important, as it implies that a lightweight sentence classifier with reasonable (but not perfect) performance is sufficient to preserve the gains of our approach. 39 Preprint. Under review. 

G.5 Summary of Takeaways 

In this Section, we evaluated potential factors of influence of TRACES. Our ablation studies enable us to better assess the robustness, of our framework. Our takeaways are as follow: 1. Flexibility and Zero-Shot adaptive computation: We showed that TRACES allows to manage the computation precisely through its parameter δ. Across models and datasets, we could expect specific token-count saving corresponding to values of 

δ. Furthermore, our framework does not requires any knowledge on the dataset or model. The training is a one-time exercise, and TRACES does not requires calibration (as opposed to existing early-exit methods). 2. Selected classes matter to compute for ratio R: To compute the ratio R, we selected specific step-types to form Constructive and Evaluative classes. We observed that the selection does have an impact on the performance of the framework. To achieve better results, the classes should carry specific information about the completeness of the model towards the correct answer. Specifically, steps included in the Con-structive class should appear mainly before the IES step. Conversely, steps included in the Evaluative class should be very frequent after the IES step. 3. TRACES robust to the Taxonomy: We showed that the granularity of classes does not strongly affects the performance of our framework. While finer-grained taxonomy better help to identify specific reasoning behavior, TRACES still work relatively well using taxonomies including smaller number of step-types. 4. Performance of Step-Taggers: Finally, we showed that the performance of the step-tagging modules affects the effectiveness of TRACES. Importantly, we showed that relatively accurate classifiers (F1 > 0.7) still results in satisfying performance of TRACES. 40 Preprint. Under review. 

H Analysis of the cost of TRACES 

H.1 Latency analysis of the Lightweight step-tagging module 

In our experimentation, we reported the number of tokens generated by the models as a proxy for the resources and latency of the inferences of the models. Indeed, we performed the experimentation offline and the number of tokens could have been computed without the need of re-running the inferences. 

Motivations. By definition, our early-stopping criteria requires an external module to per-form online annotation of the generated reasoning steps. To further validate our approach, this sub-section aims to analyze the latency introduced by our lightweight step classifiers. 

Methodology. Our experiments have been performed offline. However, we have access to both standard runtime, number of tokens, and the number of tokens of the early-stopped samples. In addition, we recorded the runtime of the lightweight classifiers when annotating each steps. To allow fair comparison of the inference latency of the early-stopped samples, we need to estimate the early-stopped runtime. The runtime of the early-stopped samples is composed of three components: 

rTRACES = rstopped + rstep classifier + rcompletion (5) where rTRACES is the total runtime of the early-stopped sample, rstopped is the runtime of the model generating tokens from the start to the early-stopping condition, rstep classifier is the runtime of the lightweight classifier annotating each reasoning step, and rcompletion is the additional runtime of the model when prompted to generate its current best answer (see Early-Stopping criteria and Answer Forcing in Section 6). 

Linear Assumption. While rstep classifier and rcompletion are accessible though our computa-tions, we need to estimate rstopped since we ran our experimentation offline. In the literature, researchers seems to acknowledge a linear relationship between the runtime and the number of token generated: “During the AR [Auto-Regressive] decoding, output tokens are generated sequentially, conditioned on all previously generated tokens. As a result, the decoding time (i.e. inference latency) increases linearly with the decoding length.” (Oh et al., 2022). This assumption is further validated by our experimentation. Indeed, Figure 29 reports linear regressions between the number of tokens and the runtime of the three selected LRMs, on the MATH500 over the 5 seeds we used.   

> (a) DS-Llama8B (b) DS-Qwen14B (c) QwQ-32B

Figure 29: Linear relationship between number of tokens and runtime 

Estimation of rstopped . Assuming linear relationship between number of tokens generated and the runtime, we estimate rstopped by fitting a linear regression between the number of generated tokens and the observed runtime of the full runs (see Figure 29). 

rstopped ≈ α · NTRACES + β (6) where Ntokens is the number of tokens generated in a full run. For each early-stopped samples, we predict its runtime using the regression model. 41 Preprint. Under review.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Dataset Models rstandard (s) Config. rstopped (s) rstep classifier (s) rcompletion (s) rTRACES (s) Speed-up (↑)MATH500 DS-Llama8B 102.32 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 83.82 0.62 5.55 89.99 ×1.14 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 73.93 0.55 4.67 79.15 ×1.29 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 59.83 0.45 4.16 64.45 ×1.59 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 43.96 0.33 4.48 48.77 ×2.09 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 30.08 0.23 3.77 34.08 ×3.00 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 19.28 0.15 4.89 24.32 ×4.21 DS-Qwen14B 138.25 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 114.32 0.49 4.70 119.51 ×1.16 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 103.89 0.46 5.35 109.70 ×1.26 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 81.63 0.38 5.01 87.02 ×1.59 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 59.69 0.29 4.82 64.79 ×2.13 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 41.85 0.21 4.78 46.84 ×2.95 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 25.72 0.14 5.11 30.97 ×4.46 QwQ-32B 281.51 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 199.04 0.53 5.66 205.22 ×1.37 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 165.51 0.46 12.46 178.43 ×1.58 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 115.92 0.36 12.22 128.49 ×2.19 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 70.91 0.26 5.44 76.61 ×3.67 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 35.79 0.17 5.39 41.35 ×6.81 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 11.65 0.11 5.59 17.35 ×16.23 GSM8K DS-Llama8B 25.83 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 21.31 0.11 3.22 24.63 ×1.05 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 19.95 0.09 5.08 25.13 ×1.03 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 17.57 0.08 3.46 21.11 ×1.22 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 15.19 0.07 3.49 18.76 ×1.38 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 13.48 0.06 2.92 16.46 ×1.57 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 12.32 0.05 3.83 16.19 ×1.59 DS-Qwen14B 27.74 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 23.26 0.05 4.32 27.63 ×1.00 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 22.58 0.05 4.15 26.78 ×1.04 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 21.31 0.05 4.32 25.67 ×1.08 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 20.14 0.04 4.47 24.65 ×1.13 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 19.40 0.04 4.27 23.71 ×1.17 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 18.71 0.03 4.37 23.12 ×1.20 QwQ-32B 117.28 TRACES ( δ−0.4) 91.22 0.22 4.88 96.32 ×1.22 TRACES ( δ−0.5) 81.78 0.19 5.04 87.02 ×1.35 TRACES ( δ−0.6) 63.42 0.15 11.28 74.84 ×1.57 TRACES ( δ−0.7) 47.72 0.12 5.23 53.07 ×2.21 TRACES ( δ−0.8) 38.39 0.09 5.26 43.75 ×2.68 TRACES ( δ−0.9) 30.51 0.08 5.41 36.01 ×3.26

Table 8: Latency analysis of the TRACES framework - For each datasets and models, we reported the average runtime per sample, across the 5 seeds. Each runtime r is expressed in seconds. We reported the standard runtime rstandard corresponding to the runtime during standard inference. The runtime rTRACES is the sum of the runtime corresponding to stopped inference ( rstopped ), the step classifier ( rstep classifier ), and the final completion ( rcompletion ). The runtime Speed-up is computed between rstandard and rTRACES .

Latency analysis. Table 8 reports the latency analysis of the experiments. The runtime analysis demonstrates a speed-up ranging from 1.2 to 3 for configurations offering limited accuracy loss, meaning that the framework leads to faster model inference for every con-figurations, compared to the standard inference. Importantly, the Table shows a very low runtime of the step classifiers (around 0.01-0.02s per reasoning steps), being two magnitudes lower than the auto-regressive generation of the models. This is because we employed BERT classifiers. It is worth noting that the final completion have more impact on the overall runtime, but is still limited compared to the model’s generation runtime since we only allowed a specific token budget (additional 100 tokens). 

Online latency. Even though we showed that the TRACES framework reduce the latency of the model’s generation, we suspect that an online implementation of the framework could result in higher latency. Indeed, although the step classification itself is fast and does not hurt the efficiency gains, our framework requires to pause the model’s generation frequently to perform step classification. To this means, this process can introduce additional latency as suggested by Yang et al. (2025). However, their findings suggest that this additional latency should be limited. 

Takeaway. This section present a latency analysis of our TRACES framework. The latency introduced by the classification process of the BERT models appears to be minimal compared to the generation’s latency of the reasoning models. Future work should look at comparing runtime of offline and online implementations to validate our findings. 42 Preprint. Under review. 

H.2 Training-inference cost trade-off 

Our framework requires training of BERT Step-Taggers to label the steps during LRMs generation. While this is a one-time exercise, this requirement implies additional computa-tion. This section offers an analysis of the training-inference cost trade-off of our TRACES framework. 

Methodology. The training cost of our TRACES framework includes three components: • Training inference. First, we first need to infer training samples of reasoning datasets. The resulting traces are used to train our BERT classifiers. • Annotation cost. Second, we need to label the reasoning traces using GPT-4o-mini to train our BERT classifiers. • Training BERT Classifiers. Finally, we need to train our BERT classifiers to then apply our framework on test samples. Each steps implies additional costs. To allow a fair comparison with our gains obtained by our framework, we will quantify these using the saved-runtime compared to standard inference against the token-count at inference of our TRACES framework. 

On the size of training datasets. In our experiments, we deliberately used a larger training dataset than necessary for the TRACES framework to demonstrate its effectiveness (training datasets being twice the size of testing datasets for MATH500, and using an additional reasoning dataset – GPQA). While this choice inflates the training cost, it ensures that the model performance is not limited by data availability. As shown in Section 5, the framework can achieve good performance using training data from a single model and only two reasoning datasets (with good generalization on other models and datasets). 

Overall results. Figure 30 shows the Training-Inference cost trade-off overall for the  

> DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B

model. In this Figure, MATH500 and GPQA train datasets are used to train the Step-Tagger module, and each configuration curve sums the saved runtime over the five selected test datasets. Figures 30a and 30b accumulates the saved runtime per token generated for one and five seeds on MATH500 and GSM8K datasets, respectively.  

> (a) Single seed (42) (b) Five seeds (40 to 44)

Figure 30: Training-Inference cost trade-off with original training and combined testing datasets. Figures 30a and 30b with one and five seeds, respectively, for MATH500 and GSM8K datasets. Single seed for AIME, GPQA and MMLU - DS-Qwen14B 

On Figure 30a, we observe that for the most restrictive configurations ( δ ≥ 0.8), the saved in-ference almost recovers the training efforts. A large part of the training runtime corresponds to the Training inference (i.e. generate CoT data), and those configurations are above that line. Other configurations (e.g. δ ≤ 0.7) offers lower saved runtime through inference. It means that it takes more samples – and tokens generated – to recover the training costs. Additionally, Figure 30b accumulates the saved runtime over the four additional seeds we used for MATH500 and GSM8K. In that case, we observe that the curves for δ ≥ 0.6 fully recovers the training costs. Furthermore, we note that our step-tagging module has been used for other models ( DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B and QwQ-32B ). Therefore, we could also consider summing the saved runtime obtained for these models – over the five seeds used, and all the configurations would recover the training efforts by far. 43 Preprint. Under review. 

Estimation of the training-inference trade-off per model and datasets. To allow a fair comparison of training-inference costs for each datasets, we first assume that each training dataset is used to train separate classifiers. This setting enables us to compare the computa-tional cost of our TRACES framework under consistent conditions between datasets. 

MATH500 and GSM8K. Figure 31 show the cumulative saved runtime of the TRACES configurations obtained compared to the standard inference baseline, against the cumulative number of inference tokens on the test MATH500 and GSM8K datasets – using the five seeds, for the three selected LRMs. First, we observe that the inference of the models, as well as the annotation of the traces by GPT-4o-mini represent a significant amount of the cumulated runtime. In comparison, the estimated training time of Step-Taggers is of lower magnitude (e.g. for MATH500 on DS-Qwen14B - 2.6 hours of training runtime for BERT vs. 67.5 hours for the reasoning data generation + annotation, see lines in gray in Figure 31c). 

Realistic configuration. The training datasets are significantly larger for both MATH500 and GSM8K, which inflates the training time. To address this, we considered smaller training datasets, equivalent to the size of the test datasets (* - see red lines). We assume that such size is enough to train accurate classifiers on the focused model and dataset. Under this assumption, we observe that most of our TRACES configurations fully recover the cost of training during inference compared to standard inference. Also, including 5 inference seeds is realistic. Indeed, the training is a one-time exercise and the model is then used for many inferences. It shows that TRACES scales as more tokens are generated during inference.    

> (a) MATH500 on DS-8B (b) GSM8K on DS-8B
> (c) MATH500 on DS-14B (d) GSM8K on DS-14B
> (e) MATH500 on QwQ-32B (f) GSM8K on QwQ-32B

Figure 31: Training-Inference cost trade-off - MATH500 and GSM8K (5 seeds) 44 Preprint. Under review. 

AIME. Similarly, our TRACES framework lead to interesting training-inference trade-off on the AIME dataset. Indeed, the TRACES ( δ = 0.9) configuration recovers all training cost by 100k inference token generated. We also observe that other configurations seems to scale well. Since training runtime are fixed (one time exercise), we expected consistent runtime saving when scaling the inference of our TRACES configurations. 

GPQA and MMLU-Pro. Same observation can be made on the GPQA dataset, where the TRACES ( δ ≥ 0.7) configurations recover all training cost by 600k inference token generated. Interestingly, the TRACES ( δ ≥ 0.6) configurations on the MMLU-Pro dataset recovers the training cost before 1.5M inference token generated, and leads to more than two fold training runtime saving at full test dataset inference. This is because we selected a training dataset of size being only 11% of the test dataset size, significantly decreasing the training runtime. It demonstrates that on low resources setting, selecting a small training dataset can reduce the training cost, while still leading to high efficiency gains and maintaining the accuracy.  

> (a) AIME
> (b) GPQA (c) MMLU-Pro

Figure 32: Training-Inference cost trade-off - DS-Qwen14B on seed 42 

Takeaways. Overall, we demonstrated that our TRACES framework can recover its one-time training cost during inference, and continues to deliver additional runtime saving compared to standard inference as more inference tokens are generated. The size of the training datasets mainly impact the trade-off. This is because our training procedure includes two costly and equivalent phases: the generation and annotation of CoT data. In comparison, the cost of training step-tagger modules is minimal (of smaller magnitude). Furthermore, we showed that the training cost can be substantially reduced while retaining the performance of our framework. More specifically, we demonstrated that our the step-tagging module can be trained once, on a single model and limited datasets, but still generalize well. This finding confirms the good robustness of our framework, and reduces significantly the training-inference cost trade-off. 45 Preprint. Under review. 

I Performance of TRACES 

I.1 MATH500 and GSM8K 

Table 9 reports all the token-usage, the proportion of saved number of tokens, the Avg@5, the Pass@5 and the Cons@5 for all configurations. Results are averaged over the 5 seeds we used. We also show in Figure 33 and 34 the average token count against the Pass@5 and Cons@5, respectively, for the three LRMs on the MATH500 and GSM8K datasets. 

Model Config. MATH500 GSM8K 

# Tokens Saved (%) Avg@5 Pass@5 Cons@5 # Tokens Saved (%) Avg@5 Pass@5 Cons@5 DS-8B Standard 3655.0 – 0.878 0.970 0.726 958.3 – 0.829 0.943 0.651 Basel. P (0) 

> user

2989.6 18.21 0.866 0.952 0.722 525.8 45.13 0.771 0.917 0.579 Basel. P (0) 

> system

2634.4 27.92 0.817 0.960 0.592 456.9 52.32 0.763 0.895 0.574 Basel. P (1) 

> system

2139.5 41.46 0.782 0.942 0.526 560.8 41.48 0.754 0.914 0.537 Basel. P (3) 

> system

2565.3 29.81 0.789 0.952 0.540 830.5 13.34 0.748 0.904 0.541 TRACES (0.4) 3049.3 16.57 0.851 0.968 0.662 806.8 15.81 0.825 0.943 0.641 TRACES (0.5) 2725.8 25.42 0.829 0.968 0.614 761.6 20.53 0.823 0.942 0.635 TRACES (0.6) 2264.1 38.05 0.785 0.952 0.530 681.8 28.85 0.815 0.942 0.614 TRACES (0.7) 1745.2 52.25 0.715 0.928 0.442 602.3 37.18 0.804 0.939 0.585 TRACES (0.8) 1290.8 64.68 0.649 0.874 0.366 544.8 43.15 0.792 0.937 0.559 TRACES (0.9) 937.4 74.35 0.567 0.824 0.284 506.1 47.18 0.775 0.936 0.534 DS-14B Standard 3388.8 – 0.923 0.980 0.836 662.9 – 0.910 0.952 0.843 Basel. P (0) 

> user

2691.5 20.58 0.933 0.982 0.834 505.1 23.80 0.856 0.956 0.662 Basel. P (0) 

> system

2346.2 30.77 0.886 0.966 0.754 470.9 28.96 0.873 0.949 0.710 Basel. P (1) 

> system

2211.4 34.74 0.873 0.974 0.708 566.5 14.54 0.838 0.952 0.629 Basel. P (3) 

> system

2535.0 25.19 0.879 0.968 0.748 839.6 -26.65 0.841 0.952 0.631 TRACES (0.4) 2878.4 15.06 0.892 0.976 0.746 567.8 9.92 0.909 0.951 0.840 TRACES (0.5) 2656.1 21.62 0.865 0.974 0.696 553.4 11.43 0.909 0.951 0.841 TRACES (0.6) 2181.4 35.63 0.811 0.956 0.598 526.5 14.23 0.906 0.951 0.832 TRACES (0.7) 1713.3 49.44 0.735 0.902 0.508 501.7 16.82 0.904 0.951 0.826 TRACES (0.8) 1332.9 60.66 0.675 0.870 0.448 485.9 18.47 0.899 0.951 0.812 TRACES (0.9) 988.8 70.82 0.595 0.796 0.392 471.5 19.97 0.891 0.948 0.795 QwQ-32B Standard 4475.3 – 0.954 0.984 0.898 2075.7 – 0.953 0.965 0.934 Basel. P (0) 

> user

2908.8 35.00 0.955 0.986 0.916 988.0 52.40 0.952 0.968 0.937 Basel. P (0) 

> system

3201.1 28.47 0.932 0.976 0.852 833.3 59.85 0.940 0.974 0.869 Basel. P (1) 

> system

3182.4 28.89 0.925 0.974 0.856 871.2 58.02 0.943 0.975 0.876 Basel. P (3) 

> system

3665.5 18.09 0.926 0.974 0.858 1387.3 33.16 0.935 0.974 0.855 TRACES (0.4) 3395.6 24.12 0.913 0.986 0.788 1685.9 18.79 0.948 0.966 0.912 TRACES (0.5) 2956.7 33.93 0.878 0.980 0.710 1544.7 25.58 0.946 0.965 0.904 TRACES (0.6) 2307.5 48.44 0.824 0.962 0.612 1270.1 38.81 0.936 0.963 0.879 TRACES (0.7) 1718.2 61.61 0.745 0.932 0.500 1035.3 50.12 0.925 0.963 0.844 TRACES (0.8) 1258.4 71.88 0.668 0.882 0.420 895.9 56.84 0.909 0.959 0.804 TRACES (0.9) 942.4 78.94 0.602 0.798 0.370 777.9 62.52 0.889 0.959 0.766 

Table 9: Performance of Step-Tagging Early stopping - 5 seeds (40, 41, 42, 43, 44) 46 Preprint. Under review. 

(a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K 

(d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500 

Figure 33: Number of Tokens vs. Pass@5 - Pguided Baselines vs. TRACES criteria 

(a) DS-Llama8B on GSM8K (b) DS-Qwen14B on GSM8K (c) QwQ-32B on GSM8K 

(d) DS-Llama8B on MATH500 (e) DS-Qwen14B on MATH500 (f) QwQ-32B on MATH500 

Figure 34: Number of Tokens vs. Cons@5 - Pguided Baselines vs. TRACES criteria 47 Preprint. Under review. 

Variance of the results across the seeds. 

Datasets MATH500 GSM8K 

Avg. # Tok. Std. # Tok. Avg@5 Std@5 Avg. # Tok. Std. # Tok. Avg@5 Std@5 DS-Llama8B 3655.0 ±290.04 0.878 ±0.009 958.3 ±213.65 0.829 ±0.014 DS-Qwen14B 3388.8 ±164.40 0.923 ±0.023 662.9 ±57.26 0.910 ±0.003 QwQ-32B 4475.3 ±248.39 0.954 ±0.018 2075.7 ±16.08 0.953 ±0.002 

Table 10: Variance of LRMs on MATH500 and GSM8K across the 5 seeds selected 

I.2 Harder mathematical tasks and beyond mathematical tasks 

Config. AIME 23-24 GPQA-Diamond MMLU-Pro 

# Tokens Saved (%) Pass@1 # Tokens Saved (%) Pass@1 # Tokens Saved (%) Pass@1 Standard 13096.3 - 0.483 7024.7 - 0.603 2501.9 - 0.652 Basel. P (0) 

> user

12748.4 2.66 0.422 4801.0 31.66 0.577 2194.1 12.30 0.665 Basel. P (0) 

> system

11095.9 15.27 0.500 4768.3 32.12 0.571 2292.9 8.35 0.675 Basel. P (1) 

> system

10181.2 22.26 0.517 3736.2 46.81 0.539 1705.6 31.83 0.637 Basel. P (3) 

> system

11635.7 11.15 0.467 4530.1 35.51 0.564 1935.2 22.65 0.613 TRACES (0.4) 10524.3 19.64 0.417 5683.2 19.10 0.589 1923.1 23.13 0.669 TRACES (0.5) 9478.9 27.62 0.383 5297.7 24.58 0.583 1880.6 24.83 0.664 TRACES (0.6) 7983.7 39.04 0.300 4570.1 34.94 0.603 1766.3 29.40 0.665 TRACES (0.7) 5949.5 54.57 0.200 3866.4 44.95 0.622 1614.7 35.46 0.652 TRACES (0.8) 4015.3 69.34 0.133 2874.6 59.07 0.583 1286.9 48.56 0.650 TRACES (0.9) 1986.5 84.83 0.050 2004.7 71.46 0.558 989.8 60.44 0.634 

Table 11: Performance of TRACES - DS-Qwen14B - seed 42 48