Title: Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15034v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:03:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Wentao Zhang 1

## Abstract 

Recent advances in LLM based agent systems have shown promise in tackling complex, long horizon tasks. However, existing agent protocols (e.g., A2A and MCP) under specify cross entity lifecycle and context management, version track-ing, and evolution safe update interfaces, which encourages monolithic compositions and brittle glue code. We introduce AUTOGENESIS PRO - 

> TOCOL

(AGP) , a self evolution protocol that de-couples what evolves from how evolution occurs. Its Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL) models prompts, agents, tools, environments, and memory as protocol registered resources 1 with explicit state, lifecycle, and versioned interfaces. Its Self Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) speci-fies a closed loop operator interface for propos-ing, assessing, and committing improvements with auditable lineage and rollback. Building on AGP , we present AUTOGENESIS SYSTEM 

(AGS) , a self-evolving multi-agent system that dynamically instantiates, retrieves, and refines protocol-registered resources during execution. We evaluate AGS on multiple challenging bench-marks that require long horizon planning and tool use across heterogeneous resources. The results demonstrate consistent improvements over strong baselines, supporting the effectiveness of agent resource management and closed loop self evolu-tion. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in LLM-based agent systems have demon-strated significant potential in tackling complex, long-horizon tasks. However, static agent designs often prove insufficient when facing the diversity and stochasticity of 

> 1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspon-dence to: Wentao Zhang <zhangwent963@gmail.com >.

> 1

Unless otherwise specified, resources refer to instances of the five RSPL entity types: prompt , agent , tool , environment , memory 

with agent outputs .

real-world environments. To overcome this limitation, en-dowing agents with self-evolution capabilities—enabling them to automatically adjust strategies, refine instructions, and update tools based on environmental feedback—has emerged as a critical avenue for achieving robust auton-omy. This transition from predefined execution to dynamic adaptation represents a fundamental shift in agentic system design. Despite the growing interest in self-evolving agents, imple-mentations remain largely fragmented and ad hoc. Existing systems often lack shared standards, rendering the evolution process neither composable nor auditable. Developers are frequently forced to rely on brittle glue code, leading to monolithic architectures that are difficult to maintain. Fur-thermore, without explicit lifecycle management and safe update interfaces, self-modification introduces significant risks of runtime instability. To address these issues, it is necessary to elevate development from ad hoc engineering practices to the protocol level, decoupling “what evolves” from “how evolution occurs” via a standardized framework to ensure modular, traceable, and safe evolution. While protocols such as Anthropic’s Model Context Pro-tocol (MCP) (Anthropic, 2025b) and Google’s Agent-to-Agent (A2A) have standardized connectivity, applying them directly to self-evolution scenarios presents a conceptual mismatch. These protocols are primarily designed to resolve connectivity challenges—specifically, model-tool invoca-tion (MCP) or inter-agent communication (A2A). However, the core of self-evolution lies not in invocation, but in state mutation and management. Existing connectivity protocols lack native support for en-tity Lifecycle and Version Lineage. In a closed-loop evolu-tionary system, if the creation, update, and destruction of components are not precisely defined, the optimizer cannot safely apply modifications. Moreover, the absence of ver-sion tracking and rollback mechanisms means that erroneous updates can lead to irrecoverable errors. Consequently, re-lying solely on communication protocols is insufficient; a novel protocol capable of managing the dynamics of muta-tion is required. To bridge the gap from connectivity to evolution, a special-ized protocol must address three essential problems: 1

> arXiv:2604.15034v1 [cs.AI] 16 Apr 2026 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol

• Decoupling: Resources such as prompts, tools, and mem-ory must be abstracted from the agent’s core logic, trans-forming them into passive, independently managed enti-ties rather than tightly coupled code blocks. • Safety & Auditability: Strict version control and roll-back mechanisms must be introduced to ensure that every evolutionary step is traceable and reversible. • Formalism: A set of standardized operators (e.g., reflect, propose, verify) needs to be defined to strictly govern the evolution process, converting heuristic text modifications into a rigorous control loop. To address these challenges, we introduce A UTOGENESIS .Far from being merely a utility library, A UTOGENESIS is a two-layer protocol architecture designed to strictly decouple the evolutionary substrate from the evolutionary logic. Our core motivation is to standardize underlying resource repre-sentations, enabling the same optimization algorithms (Yuk-sekgonul et al., 2025; Shao et al., 2024; Hu, 2025b) to be seamlessly applied across diverse agent components. • Layer 1: Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL). 

This layer defines the substrate of evolution, modeling Prompts, Agents, Tools, Environments, and Memory as Protocol-registered Resources. RSPL endows these re-sources with explicit state, lifecycle, and versioned inter-faces, rendering them standardized objects amenable to observation and manipulation. • Layer 2: Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL). 

This layer establishes a closed-loop operator interface grounded in control theory. It defines atomic opera-tions—Reflect, Select, Improve, Evaluate, and Com-mit—to formally execute the evolution cycle, ensuring that every self-modification is documented and adheres to strict safety constraints. Building on this protocol, we present A UTOGENESIS -AGENT , a reasoning-and-acting tool-calling agent. Instead of relying on hard-coded components, it dynamically instan-tiates, retrieves, and refines resources via protocol interfaces during execution. We evaluated this system on multiple chal-lenging benchmarks, including GPQA (Rein et al., 2024), AIME, GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023), and LeetCode (Leet-Code). The results demonstrate that by leveraging stan-dardized resource management and closed-loop evolution, AUTOGENESIS -A GENT consistently achieves significant improvements over strong baselines. The significance of this work extends beyond performance gains; it illustrates a potential shift from manual prompt en-gineering to automated protocol engineering. By equipping agents with standardized self-repair and evolution capabili-ties, A UTOGENESIS provides a foundational paradigm for building next-generation agent systems capable of sustained autonomous adaptation in complex environments. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. LLM-based Agent Systems and Tool Use 

Recent progress in large language model (LLM) based agent systems has demonstrated their ability to address complex, long-horizon tasks that require multi-step reasoning and external tool interaction (Rein et al., 2024; Mialon et al., 2023). In these systems, LLMs typically serve as central-ized decision-making modules that interpret observations, decompose tasks, and invoke tools to affect the environment. Benchmarks such as GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023) have fur-ther highlighted the importance of structured tool use and planning capabilities in agent design. Most existing agent frameworks adopt architectures in which prompts, tools, and memory are embedded as tightly coupled internal components. Tools are commonly treated as fixed functional modules that are manually curated and in-tegrated into the agent pipeline. While effective for bounded tasks, this design limits systematic reuse and controlled adaptation of tools as task requirements evolve. In con-trast, our approach models tools (including native scripts, MCP tools (Anthropic, 2025a), and agent skills (Anthropic, 2025b)) as protocol-registered resources with explicit inter-faces and state representations, enabling dynamic instantia-tion and controlled refinement during execution. 

2.2. Connectivity and Interoperability Protocols 

As agent-based systems grow in scale and complexity, several protocol-level efforts have emerged to standardize model–tool interaction and inter-agent communication. An-thropic’s Model Context Protocol (MCP) (Anthropic, 2025a) provides a unified interface for connecting language mod-els to external tools and data sources. Similarly, Google’s Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol aims to standardize commu-nication primitives that support collaboration among multi-ple agents. These protocols primarily address interoperability at the level of invocation and message passing. They specify how agents and tools interact, but largely leave the internal state of agents and resources opaque. In particular, they do not define mechanisms for managing resource lifecycles, track-ing version lineage, or constraining state mutations over time. As a result, while connectivity protocols simplify in-tegration, they do not directly support the persistent state evolution required by self-modifying agent systems. 

2.3. Self-Correction and Optimization Mechanisms 

A parallel line of work investigates mechanisms that enable agents to improve their performance through self-correction and optimization. Methods such as TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2025) interpret natural language feedback as a signal 2Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

analogous to gradients, enabling iterative updates to string-valued components such as prompts. Reinforcement learn-ing based approaches have also been applied to agent im-provement. Techniques including Reinforce++ (Hu, 2025a) and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) frame agent components as policies and use evaluation signals as rewards to guide optimization. While these methods demonstrate that agent behaviors can be iteratively improved, they are typically applied within narrowly scoped settings and lack a shared abstraction for managing heterogeneous agent components. Updates are often applied directly to prompts or policies without ex-plicit lifecycle control, version tracking, or rollback support. AUTOGENESIS provides a protocol-level abstraction that accommodates these optimization strategies by exposing agent components as standardized, evolvable resources and defining operator-level interfaces through which different optimization methods can be applied in a controlled manner. 

2.4. Summary 

Existing work on agent systems, interoperability protocols, and self-optimization has laid important foundations for autonomous behavior. However, these efforts do not pro-vide a unified protocol for managing the persistent state evolution of agent-internal resources. In particular, cur-rent connectivity protocols emphasize interaction but do not address lifecycle management or versioned state muta-tion. A UTOGENESIS addresses this gap by introducing a two-layer protocol architecture that separates the definition of evolvable resources from the mechanisms that govern their evolution, enabling modular, traceable, and auditable self-evolution in multi-agent systems. 

## 3. Autogenesis 

Despite growing interest in self-evolving agents, most sys-tems remain engineered in an ad hoc manner and lack a shared protocol standard that makes evolution composable, auditable, and interoperable. We introduce AGP , a two-layer self-evolution protocol. The Resource Substrate Proto-col Layer (RSPL) specifies the evolvable substrate, namely which resources may change and how they are represented, versioned, and accessed. The Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) specifies the evolution logic, namely how updates are proposed, assessed, and committed through a safe oper-ator interface. Inspired by interface standardization efforts in agent tooling (e.g., the Model Context Protocol), this separation cleanly decouples what evolves from how evo-lution occurs , enabling modularity, traceability, and safety-preserving evolution across components. 

3.1. Layer 1: Resource Substrate Protocol Layer 

The Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL) defines the evolvable substrate as a set of protocol-registered resources 2

with explicit state, lifecycle, and version lineage. In this pa-per, these resources comprise (i) instructions ( Prompt ), (ii) 

decision policies (Agent ), (iii) actuation interfaces ( Tool ), which encompass native tool scripts, MCP tools (Anthropic, 2025a), and agent skills (Anthropic, 2025b), (iv) task/world dynamics ( Environment ), and (v) persistent state (Memory ). Crucially, resources in RSPL are passive : they encapsulate no optimization logic and cannot self-modify; all observa-tions and state transitions occur only through controlled, interface-mediated operations invoked by higher layers. 3.1.1. C ORE ENTITIES 

We focus on these five entity types as a minimal yet ex-pressive substrate for agentic systems. This choice is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to identify a common denominator across modern agent stacks and provide a uni-form target space on which SEPL can operate. 

Definition 3.1 (Resource Entity) . A resource entity of type 

τ and its type-level collection can be represented as: 

eτ,i = ( nτ,i , d τ,i , ϕ τ,i , g τ,i , m τ,i ),

Eτ = { eτ,i | i ∈ I τ }, (1) where T = {PROMPT , AGENT , TOOL , ENV , MEM } de-notes the set of RSPL entity types, τ ∈ T indexes the entity type, Iτ is the index set of resource instances of type τ , and 

i ∈ I τ indexes an individual instance. Here nτ,i is a unique resource name, dτ,i is a short description, ϕτ,i : Xτ → Y τ

is an input-to-output mapping, gτ,i ∈ { 0, 1} is the trainable marker that indicates whether the resource is evolvable, and 

mτ,i is an auxiliary metadata dictionary. A key motivation for making prompt, tool, and memory explicit RSPL resources is decoupling . Many agent systems package prompts, tools, and memory as internal compo-nents of an agent, which entangles agent logic with task-specific instructions and capability bundles, increasing main-tenance and limiting transfer. By externalizing them as first-class, versioned resources with standardized interfaces, the same tool-calling agent policy can be paired with different prompts and tool sets, and deployed unchanged across tasks and environments. To support resource registration, unified management, and instantiation, RSPL stores a serializable registration record for each resource instance. 

Definition 3.2 (Resource Registration Record) . A resource   

> 2Unless otherwise specified, we use resources to refer to in-stances of the five RSPL entity types: prompt, agent, tool, environ-ment, and memory.

3Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol Prompt 

> (εPrompt )
> Agent
> (εAgent )
> Tool
> (εTool )
> Environment
> (εEnv )
> Memory
> (εMen )
> Core Resources
> Version
> Manager
> Infrastructure Services
> Model
> Manager
> Dynamic
> Manager
> Tracer
> Module
> Registration
> Lifecycle Control
> State Access
> Server Interface &
> Context Manager

Layer 1: Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL) 

> Operator Algebra & Evolutionary Loop
> Evolvable Variables ( Vevo )

Layer 2: Self -Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL)           

> V1.0.1 V1.0.0 V1.0.3 V1.0.6 V1.0.0 V1.0.1
> Multi -Agent
> Optimization
> Cycle
> 5. Commit
> Improvement Commit
> 1. Generate
> Answer Initialization
> 3. Improve
> Variables Improvement
> 4. Evaluate
> Answer Evaluation
> 2. Reflect
> Proposal Generation

Multi -agent System                

> Reporter Agent
> Add
> Content
> Export
> Report
> Browser Use Agent
> Record
> Results
> Browser
> Actions
> Decide
> Actions
> Deep Researcher Agent
> Optimize
> Queries
> Search
> Tools
> Refine
> Insight
> Deep Analyzer Agent
> Organize
> Diverse Formats
> Reason and
> Summarize
> Tool Generator Agent
> Tool
> Retrieval
> Tool
> Creation
> Tool
> Reuse
> Planning Agent
> Tools
> Planning
> Interprete Decompose Assign
> into manageable
> sub -tasks
> user tasks to specialized
> sub -agents
> User Objectives
> sub -agent A
> sub -agent B
> tool C
> …… Feedback
> Create a new plan
> Update the plan
> Delete the plan
> Mark step as completed
> Actions
> create
> update
> delete
> mark
> Planning Tool
> Create, update, and manage plans
> for complex tasks simultaneously
> Track execution states
> &Unexpected Errors Objective Shifts (Update
> Plans)
> Math Problem
> Solving Trading
> Game
> Playing Brower Use Computer Use
> Version Lineage

Protocol Application 

Figure 1. The Autogenesis architecture. 

registration record and its type-level collection can be repre-sented as: 

cτ,i = ( eτ,i , v τ,i , η τ,i , θ τ,i , Fτ,i ),

Cτ = { cτ,i | i ∈ I τ }, (2) where τ ∈ T indexes the entity type and i ∈ I τ indexes an individual instance. Here eτ,i is the resource entity tuple defined in Theorem 3.1, vτ,i ∈ V is a version string, ητ,i is an implementation descriptor (e.g., import path, class defini-tion, or source-code string), θτ,i are instantiation parameters (e.g., constructor arguments), and Fτ,i is a set of exported representations used by LLMs to interact with the resource (e.g., function-calling schema, natural-language text, and structured argument schema). 

Definition 3.3 (Protocol-registered resource) . For each entity type τ , let Rτ denote the type-specific registry of protocol-registered resources, and let R = S

τ Rτ denote the global registry. RSPL binds each entity type τ to a dedi-cated context manager Mτ and a server-exposed interface 

Aτ . We represent the type-level registered resource as 

rτ = ( Cτ , Mτ , Aτ ), (3) where each cτ,i ∈ C τ is a registration record in Theorem 3.2. The context manager Mτ maintains the collection Cτ , the version lineage for type τ , and implements lifecycle and update operations over these records; the server-exposed interface Aτ encapsulates Mτ and exposes a unified exter-nal interface by delegating requests to the corresponding context-manager routines. 

Context manager. The context manager implements the management plane for each resource type. Beyond lifecycle control and dependency constraints, it maintains (i) an ac-tive registry of materialized resources and (ii) a versioned history for restoration. Its exported API can be viewed as a small set of functionally grouped operators for lifecycle and registration (e.g., init , build ), retrieval and inspection (e.g., list , get state ), evolution and versioning (e.g., 

update , restore ), execution and contract (e.g., run ,

load contract ), and serialization and deserialization (e.g., save to json , load from json ). The manager explicitly supports contract generation , producing a consoli-dated capability and constraint specification for the managed entities, which provides stable, up-to-date descriptions that improve reliability and reduce prompt bloat, enabling sys-tematic context engineering via controlled prompt injection. For instance, for tools (which may be native scripts, MCP tools, or agent skills) the contract can take a skills.md -style form (Anthropic, 2025b) that enumerates tool actions, arguments, preconditions, and usage constraints. Concrete interface instantiations can be found in Section C.1.2. 

Server interface. The server is introduced to encapsulate the context manager’s internal complexity and present a stable, simplified interface for external callers. It packages heterogeneous management routines behind a uniform set of endpoints with consistent request/response semantics, while delegating the implementation details to the context man-ager. This separation isolates clients from internal design changes, reduces coupling, and provides a single control plane through which the protocol mediates safe, version-aware interactions with RSPL resources. 3.1.2. I NFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES 

RSPL further includes cross-cutting services that support re-liable evolution, including reproducibility, safe deployment, and versioned recovery: 4Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Model manager. A unified model-API layer that standard-izes calls across providers (e.g., OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and OpenRouter, etc.), while supporting routing, fallback, and cost-aware selection to keep model access consistent as components evolve. 

Version manager. Maintains version lineage for each re-source, enabling rollback, branching, and diffing. Versions are auto-incremented identifiers (e.g., semantic versions) as-signed on register or update, each referencing an immutable snapshot of the configuration record and associated artifacts for auditability and reproducibility. 

Dynamic manager. Handles serialization or deserialization of resource configurations for persistence and transfer, en-abling safe hot-swapping of resources at runtime without restarting the agent system. 

Tracer Module. A module that captures fine-grained exe-cution traces (inputs, outputs, intermediate decisions, tool interactions, etc.) for interpretability and debugging, and as training signals for dataset synthesis and retrospective improvement. 

3.2. Layer 2: Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) 

The Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) establishes a control-theoretic formalism for agentic system evolution. It conceptualizes the continuous improvement of an agentic system as a generalized optimization problem defined over a heterogeneous state space. Formally, SEPL models evolu-tionary dynamics as a state transition function governed by a strictly typed operator algebra. By mediating all state mutations through standardized RSPL interfaces, the protocol guarantees that evolution is trace-able, reversible, and safe-by-construction. While this paper focuses on the reflection-driven optimizer as the primary instantiation, our implementation also supports other opti-mization strategies, including TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2025), GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), and Reinforce++ (Hu, 2025b), utilizing the same state manipulation primitives. Further details on these alternative implementations are pro-vided in Section C.2. 3.2.1. E VOLVABLE VARIABLES 

To transition from heuristic adaptation to a systematic evo-lution protocol, we introduce the concept of variable lifting .This abstraction projects discrete, heterogeneous RSPL re-sources (e.g., tool code, system prompts) onto a unified representation of evolvable variables. This formalism offers significant theoretical advantages by homogenizing the in-teraction surface for evolutionary operators and rigorously delineating the trainable subspace via an explicit learnability mask. 

Definition 3.4 (Evolvable Variable Set) . We define the uni-versal set of evolvable variables, Vevo , as the union of all managed resource entities and execution artifacts: 

Vevo = [ 

> τ∈T

Eτ

!

∪ { y}, (4) where Eτ denotes the set of resource entities of type τ

governed by the RSPL. The element y encapsulates execu-tion artifacts, specifically final outputs and reasoning traces, which constitute the observational basis for retrospective optimization. Furthermore, each variable v ∈ V evo is as-sociated with a binary learnability constraint gv ∈ { 0, 1},thereby strictly defining the trainable parameter subspace 

Θ = {v ∈ V evo | gv = 1 }.3.2.2. O PERATOR ALGEBRA 

To formalize the evolutionary trajectory as a rigorous con-trol process, we decompose the state transition function into atomic operations that correspond to the canonical phases of iterative optimization: observation, attribution, proposal, verification, and commit. Consequently, we es-tablish five necessary auxiliary spaces to ensure the process is mathematically well-defined. The trace space Z guaran-tees system observability; the hypothesis space H provides the basis for semantic error attribution; the modification space D formalizes the modification primitives; the objec-tive specification G defines the optimization landscape; and the evaluation space S encapsulates performance metrics and safety status. These components constitute the minimal sufficiency required to close the self-evolution loop. 

Reflect ( ρ). Defined as ρ : Z × V evo → ℘(H), this operator bridges the gap between raw observation and optimization direction. It approximates the “semantic gradient” of the system by mapping high-dimensional execution traces to specific, causal failure hypotheses within the variable space. 

Select ( σ). Formulated as σ : Vevo ×℘(H) → ℘(D), this op-erator acts as the generative policy. It translates diagnostic hypotheses into concrete update proposals, sampling can-didate modifications D designed to minimize the identified error signal subject to structural constraints. 

Improve ( ι). The mutation operator, ι : Vevo ×℘(D) → V ′

> evo

,executes the physical state transition. It applies discrete updates D via standardized RSPL interfaces to yield a pro-visional candidate state. 

Evaluate ( ε). Specified as ε : V′ 

> evo

× G → S , this operator serves as the objective function. It maps the candidate state and goal specification to the evaluation space S (comprising quantitative scores and strict safety invariants). 

Commit ( κ). Operating as κ : V′ 

> evo

× S → V evo , this func-tion acts as a conditional gating mechanism. It utilizes the 5Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Algorithm 1 SEPL Evolutionary Loop 

Input: Agentic System A, Objective G, Budget T

Output: Optimized state V∗ 

> evo
> 1:

Initialization:  

> 2:

V(0)  

> evo

← VariableLifting (A) ▷ Project resources to optimization manifold  

> 3:

Z(0) ← Execute (A, V(0)  

> evo

) ▷ Obtain initial observational trace  

> 4:

Optimization Cycle:  

> 5:

for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T − 1 do  

> 6:

// Phase 1: Diagnosis & Proposal  

> 7:

H(t) ← ρ(Z(t), V(t) 

> evo

) ▷ Reflect: Compute semantic gradients  

> 8:

D(t) ← σ(V(t) 

> evo

, H(t)) ▷ Select: Generate modification primitives  

> 9:

// Phase 2: Mutation & Verification  

> 10:

eV(t+1)  

> evo

← ι(V(t) 

> evo

, D(t)) ▷ Improve: Apply updates to candidate  

> 11:

S(t+1) ← ε(eV(t+1)  

> evo

, G) ▷ Evaluate: Map to evaluation space  

> 12:

// Phase 3: Gating & Transition  

> 13:

V(t+1)  

> evo

← κ(eV(t+1)  

> evo

, S(t+1) ) ▷ Commit: Conditional state transition  

> 14:

// Phase 4: Next Iteration  

> 15:

Z(t+1) ← Execute (A, V(t+1)  

> evo

) 

> 16:

if Converged (S(t+1) ) then  

> 17:

break  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

return V(t)

> evo

evaluation signals in S to govern state transition, rigorously enforcing safety invariants and performance monotonicity by accepting the candidate V′ 

> evo

only when specific success criteria are met. 3.2.3. T HE EVOLUTIONARY LOOP 

The atomic operators defined above are orchestrated into a rigorous closed-loop process, summarized in Algorithm 1. Starting from an initial state V(0)  

> evo

, SEPL iteratively executes the system to generate observational traces ( Z), derives causal failure hypotheses ( H), and synthesizes modification primitives ( D). Crucially, the loop is closed via the evaluation space S

and the commit operator κ. This design ensures that self-evolution is not a random walk, but a directed trajectory that is grounded in execution data, traceable through versioned updates, and monotonically improving under strictly defined safety invariants. 

## 4. AGS and Optimization Strategies 

This section presents the concrete instantiation of the AGP 

protocol, demonstrating its practical usability as a self-evolving agent system. 

4.1. AGS Architecture 

Building on AGP , we instantiate the two-layer protocol into AGS , a self-evolving multi-agent system organized around an Agent Bus architecture. Rather than relying on a monolithic controller or a rigid pipeline, AGS uses a shared message bus as the central coordination backbone: all agents communicate exclusively through standardized bus messages, enabling loose coupling, transparent observ-ability, and concurrent sub-agent execution. Throughout all configurations, prompts, tools (including native scripts, MCP tools, and agent skills), and memory are treated as 

first-class RSPL resources with explicit lifecycle and ver-sion lineage, rather than hard-coded internal components. The system operates through three interleaved mechanisms: 

Orchestration via Plan Generation. Upon receiving a task from the Agent Bus, the Orchestrator is responsible solely for planning and coordination; it does not execute subtasks directly. Concretely, the Orchestrator produces a structured plan.md artifact that records the overall task decomposition: a human-readable flowchart of the execu-tion graph, an ordered list of subtask steps, and the assign-ment of each subtask to a designated sub-agent (e.g., deep researcher, browser-use agent, tool-calling agent, or tool generator). This plan is registered as a versioned RSPL re-source, making the coordination structure itself inspectable and evolvable. The Orchestrator then broadcasts each sub-task together with its specification to the corresponding sub-agents via the bus. 

Concurrent Sub-Agent Execution and Iterative Re-planning. Upon receiving a broadcast subtask, each sub-agent independently retrieves the relevant prompt and tool resources from the RSPL registry via semantic search, exe-cutes tool calls to interact with the environment, and writes intermediate results and reasoning traces to shared memory as persistent, queryable state. Sub-agents operate concur-rently: the bus decouples task dispatch from task completion, so multiple sub-agents may execute in parallel without syn-chronization overhead. Once all sub-agents in the current round have completed, the Orchestrator collects their out-puts via the bus, summarizes the aggregated results, and up-dates plan.md with the current execution state. Based on this global view, the Orchestrator decides whether the task is complete or whether a further round of subtask decomposi-tion and broadcast is required. This collect-and-replan loop repeats until the termination condition is satisfied, enabling the system to handle tasks of arbitrary depth and branching complexity. As a complementary pattern, AGS also sup-6Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

ports agent-as-tool composition, in which a sub-agent is wrapped behind a standard RSPL tool schema and directly invoked by a tool-calling agent alongside conventional tools, MCP services, and skills, enabling lightweight multi-agent collaboration without bus-level orchestration. 

Self-Evolution. Interleaved with the bus coordination loop, 

AGS triggers the SEPL evolutionary loop (Algorithm 1) whenever observational traces signal correctable failures or suboptimal performance. Concretely, the agent (i) reflects on execution traces Z (tool outputs, errors, latencies, reward signals, and task progress) to derive causal failure hypothe-ses H, (ii) selects targeted modification proposals D over evolvable variables (e.g., prompt text, tool source code for native scripts, MCP tool configurations, skill definitions, or the plan structure itself), (iii) applies candidate updates to produce a provisional state eVevo , (iv) evaluates the candidate against the objective G, and (v) commits accepted modifi-cations as versioned transitions with auditable lineage and rollback. Failed evolution attempts are rolled back with-out side effects, and successful ones become immediately available to all sub-agents in subsequent bus rounds. This tight integration ensures that evolution is always safe, trace-able, and composable across the full lifetime of the agent network. 

4.2. Instantiating the Optimizer 

The AGP protocol is agnostic to the specific optimization strategy: any procedure that conforms to the five-operator SEPL interface ( ρ, σ, ι, ε, κ) can serve as the evolution-ary engine. We describe the primary instantiation used in our experiments and briefly outline alternative strategies supported by our implementation. 

Reflection Optimizer. The default optimizer in our experi-ments implements the SEPL loop through natural-language reflection. Given an execution trace Z(t) and the current evolvable state V(t) 

> evo

, the Reflect operator ρ prompts the back-bone LLM to analyze failures and generate structured di-agnostic hypotheses H(t) in natural language (e.g., “the prompt lacks explicit instruction for edge-case handling” or “the sorting algorithm has O(n2) complexity on the crit-ical path”). The Select operator σ then translates these hypotheses into concrete modification proposals D(t), such as appending constraint clauses to the system prompt or rewriting a function body. The Improve operator ι applies these proposals through the RSPL set variables inter-face to produce a candidate state. The Evaluate operator ε

re-executes the task under the candidate state and compares performance against the objective G. Finally, the Commit 

operator κ accepts the update only if performance improves or safety invariants are preserved, otherwise rolling back to the previous version. This reflection-driven loop is repeated for a fixed budget of T rounds. 

Alternative Strategies. Beyond reflection, our implemen-tation supports additional optimization strategies that map naturally onto the same SEPL operator interface: 

TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2025) treats the natural-language feedback produced by ρ as a “textual gradient” and applies gradient-descent-like updates to string-valued variables (prompts, code). Within AGP , TextGrad instanti-ates σ as a gradient-informed proposal generator and ι as a string-level edit operator, while reusing the standard ε and 

κ for evaluation and gating. 

Reinforce++ / GRPO (Hu, 2025b; Shao et al., 2024) adopt a reinforcement-learning perspective, treating the evolv-able variables as a policy and the evaluation signal as a reward. Here, ρ samples multiple candidate trajectories, 

σ ranks them by reward, ι updates the policy parameters (e.g., prompt weights or LoRA adapters) via policy-gradient estimates, and κ commits only if the updated policy exceeds a baseline return threshold. These strategies demonstrate that the SEPL operator algebra is sufficiently general to accommodate both inference-time text optimization and gradient-based parameter updates within a unified protocol. 

## 5. Empirical Studies 

In this section, we present empirical results of deploying 

AGS across various challenging benchmarks with AGP 

protocol to demonstrate its comprehensive capabilities. 

Benchmark Instruction. For GPQA-Diamond (198 ques-tions), we adopt a closed-book, non-retrieval evaluation pro-tocol. The agent is presented with a graduate-level STEM multiple-choice question (covering biology, chemistry, and physics) and must output exactly one option as the final an-swer. GPQA-Diamond is designed to be Google-proof, such that simple web search is insufficient and success typically requires difficult, multi-step scientific reasoning beyond fac-tual recall. Overall, this benchmark measures the agent’s deep scientific understanding and closed-book reasoning ability. For AIME , we use problems from the 2024 and 2025 American Invitational Mathematics Examination ( AIME24 

and AIME25 ), each consisting 30 problems. Each instance requires the agent to solve a competition-level problem and output a single integer answer. We evaluate performance by exact-match accuracy, which primarily measures the agent’s long-horizon symbolic reasoning and arithmetic precision. For GAIA , we evaluate on the GAIA Test split (300 tasks). Each task specifies a real-world, multi-step objective that typically requires planning and tool use (e.g., web browsing and document/file operations). We measure performance by task success (completion), which primarily reflects the agent’s long-horizon planning and reliable tool-use execu-tion. For LeetCode , we construct an in-house, LeetCode multi-language programming benchmark to evaluate ex-7Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

ecutable code generation under reduced data contamina-tion. To mitigate potential training-data contamination from widely circulated legacy problems, we intentionally select recently released problems across diverse categories (e.g., arrays, trees, linked lists, etc.) and split them into 200 train-ing problems and 100 test problems. The agent solves each problem in one of multiple languages (Python, C++, Java, Go, etc.), and we report multiple metrics including overall score (acceptance), test-case pass rate, and runtime, which together measure algorithmic reasoning, implementation correctness, and efficiency. 

5.1. Experiments on Scientific and Mathematical Benchmarks 

5.1.1. E XPERIMENT SETTING 

To validate our self-evolving agent AGS based on the 

AGP protocol, we conduct experiments across GPQA-Diamond , AIME24 , and AIME25 , focusing on evolv-ing prompts and agent outputs. These benchmarks rep-resent standard reasoning tasks where evolution of agent architecture, memory systems, environments, and tools is relatively less critical compared to instruction refinement and solution quality. To isolate the self-evolution capa-bility on prompts and solutions, we deliberately do not equip AGS with any external tools in this setting, and com-pare three evolution strategies: evolve prompt only, evolve solution only, and the combined evolve prompt+solution. To ensure comprehensive coverage across model capa-bilities, we evaluate using multiple backbone models: lower-performing models ( gpt-4o , gpt-4.1 ), a medium-performing model (claude-sonnet-4.5 ), and ahigh-performing model ( gemini-3-flash-preview ,

grok-4.1-fast ). Our self-evolution algorithm primar-ily employs the reflection optimizer with a maximum of 3 optimization rounds, after which the agent output is taken as the final solution. 

Metrics. We measure performance by exact-match accu-racy: for GPQA-Diamond , the agent’s selected option must match the ground-truth multiple-choice answer; for 

AIME24 and AIME25 , the agent’s numerical output must exactly match the reference integer answer. 5.1.2. R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

The results in Table 1 reveal four key observations across models and evolution strategies. (1) Weak models gain more; strong models gain less. gpt-4.1 , with lower vanilla baselines (23.3% on AIME24, 20.0% on AIME25), improves by 71.4% on AIME24 and 66.7% on AIME25 under evolve prompt+solution. In contrast, 

gemini-3-flash-preview starts at 83–88% and im-proves by 2.3% on GPQA-Diamond and 12.0% on both AIME benchmarks. The reason is straightforward: evolution                                                                                  

> Table 1. Results on GPQA-Diamond ,AIME24 and AIME25 .
> Approach GPQA-Diamond AIME24 AIME25
> gpt-4o
> vanilla 47.98 13.34 6.67 evolve prompt 53.81 13.34 13.34 evolve solution 53.53 16.67 13.34 evolve prompt + solution 58.08 16.67 13.34
> Improvement(%) 21.05 ↑24.97 ↑100 ↑
> gpt-4.1
> vanilla 65.15 23.34 20.00 evolve prompt 68.68 33.33 23.33 evolve solution 68.68 36.67 30.00 evolve prompt + solution 67.67 40.00 33.33
> Improvement(%) 3.87 ↑71.38 ↑66.65 ↑
> grok-4.1-fast
> vanilla 83.33 96.67 90.00 evolve prompt 83.84 96.67 93.33 evolve solution 87.81 96.67 90.00 evolve prompt + solution 89.34 96.67 96.67
> Improvement(%) 7.21 ↑0.00 7.41 ↑
> claude-sonnet-4.5
> vanilla 78.28 76.67 73.33 evolve prompt 79.79 86.67 90.00 evolve solution 80.30 80.00 90.00 evolve prompt + solution 81.44 86.67 90.00
> Improvement(%) 4.04 ↑13.04 ↑22.73 ↑
> gemini-3-flash-preview
> vanilla 88.38 83.33 83.33 evolve prompt 88.89 93.33 86.67 evolve solution 87.88 93.33 90.00 evolve prompt + solution 90.40 93.33 93.33
> Improvement(%) 2.28 ↑12.00 ↑12.00 ↑

corrects errors exposed during reflection; weaker models make more correctable mistakes, whereas stronger mod-els already operate near ceiling. claude-sonnet-4.5 

occupies a middle tier (76–78% vanilla) and improves by 4.0%, 13.0%, and 22.7% on GPQA, AIME24, and AIME25, respectively, confirming that headroom correlates with evolution benefit. (2) Combined evolution dominates prompt-only and solution-only. Across all models, evolve prompt+solution consistently yields the best scores. For 

gpt-4.1 on AIME24, evolve prompt reaches 33.3% and evolve solution 36.7%, whereas the combined approach reaches 40.0%; on AIME25, the respective scores are 23.3%, 30.0%, and 33.3%. claude-sonnet-4.5 shows similar patterns: evolve prompt+solution outperforms either single strategy on all three benchmarks. This suggests that instruc-tion refinement and solution refinement address comple-mentary failure modes; combining both closes more errors than either alone. (3) Math benchmarks respond more strongly than science QA. AIME24 and AIME25 exhibit larger relative gains than GPQA-Diamond. For gpt-4.1 ,GPQA improves by 3.9% while AIME24 improves by 71.4%; for gemini-3-flash-preview , GPQA im-proves by 2.3% while both AIME benchmarks improve by 12.0%. Long-horizon symbolic reasoning (multi-step deriva-8Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

tions, arithmetic chains) exposes more intermediate failure points that reflection can target; closed-book science QA, by contrast, relies more on factual recall where prompt/solution refinement offers fewer levers. (4) Ceiling effects cap evolution on saturated benchmarks. grok-4.1-fast 

reaches 96.7% on AIME24 with vanilla, leaving minimal headroom; evolution yields no gain there. It still improves GPQA and AIME25 by 7.2% and 7.4%, respectively, where baselines are lower. This reinforces that self-evolution is most effective when both model capability and benchmark difficulty leave room for improvement. In summary, AGS delivers consistent gains across diverse model capabilities and benchmarks throughout our exper-iments. Stronger models improve modestly but reliably; weaker models improve substantially when sufficient head-room exists. The combined prompt+solution evolution strat-egy consistently outperforms single-strategy evolution, and math benchmarks benefit more strongly than science QA from iterative refinement. 

5.2. Experiments on General Agent Benchmark 

5.2.1. E XPERIMENT SETTING 

For GAIA, we focus on evolving tools, as GAIA tasks pri-marily depend on tool capabilities rather than pure rea-soning. Our system architecture consists of a top-level planner agent ( m = 50 ) and multiple specialized sub-agents: a deep researcher ( m = 3 ), a browser-use agent (m = 3), a report agent, a tool generator ( m = 3), and a deep analyzer agent ( m = 3 ). All agents utilize 

gemini-3-flash-preview as the backbone model, where m denotes the maximum number of reasoning steps per agent. The self-evolution of tools is primarily driven by the tool generator agent: given a subtask, it first retrieves candidate tools from the managed tool registry via seman-tic search; if a suitable tool is found, the agent attempts to execute it, and upon encountering errors, iteratively refines the tool’s source code through reflection; if no suitable tool exists, the agent synthesizes a new tool from scratch and registers it as a versioned RSPL resource for future reuse. 

Metrics. We adopt the Pass@1 score on the GAIA Test split and report task-completion accuracy at each difficulty tier (Level 1, Level 2, Level 3) as well as the overall average. The results in Table 2 reveal three key observations. 

(1) AGS achieves state-of-the-art performance. With an average score of 89.04%, AGS surpasses all public leaderboard entries, outperforming the next-best agent ToolOrchestra (87.38%) by 1.66 percentage points. This advantage is especially pronounced on the hardest tier: 

AGS scores 81.63% on Level 3, compared to 69.39% for HALO and 57.14% for AWorld, demonstrating that evolution-driven adaptation provides the largest gains where                                                              

> Table 2. Performance results for agents on GAIA Test benchmark.
> Agent Level1 Level2 Level3 Average
> o4-mini-DR 67.59 59.10 44.28 59.30 JoyAgent 77.42 67.30 46.94 67.11 o3-DR 79.42 68.97 47.48 68.70 Langfun 84.95 73.58 48.98 73.09 Alita 92.47 71.70 55.10 75.42 DeSearch 91.40 75.47 61.22 78.07 h2oGPTe-Agent 89.25 79.87 61.22 79.73 Su-Zero-Ultra 93.55 77.36 65.31 80.40 AWorld 95.70 81.13 57.14 81.73 HALO 94.62 84.91 69.39 85.38 ToolOrchestra 95.70 82.39 87.76 87.38 vanilla 91.40 77.36 61.22 79.07 evolve tool 98.92 85.53 81.63 89.04
> Improvement(%) 8.23 ↑10.56 ↑33.34 ↑12.61 ↑

task complexity is highest. On the easier tiers, the gap nar-rows but remains consistent: Level 1 reaches 98.92% (vs. 95.70% for ToolOrchestra) and Level 2 reaches 85.53% (vs. 84.91% for HALO), indicating that tool evolution provides broad-spectrum improvement rather than being limited to a single difficulty regime. (2) Tool evolution yields large gains on hard tasks. Compared to the vanilla baseline (79.07% avg.), evolve tool improves performance by 12.6% overall. The improvement is strongly skewed toward diffi-culty: Level 1 gains 8.2%, Level 2 gains 10.6%, and Level 3 gains 33.3%. This pattern mirrors the headroom effect ob-served in the math benchmarks: harder tasks expose more correctable failure modes, which the reflection-driven tool evolution can target. Notably, the 33.3% gain on Level 3 represents the single largest relative improvement across all benchmarks in our study, underscoring that tool evolu-tion is particularly effective when tasks demand complex multi-step tool chains that static toolkits cannot adequately cover. (3) Hierarchical resource management mitigates planning complexity. GAIA’s multi-domain tasks require temporal and cross-modal state coherence, and many base-lines degrade during domain transitions (e.g., from browser retrieval to local file analysis). By treating prompts, tools, and environments as first-class RSPL resources with ex-plicit lifecycle management, AGS preserves session-critical state across agent boundaries, reducing contextual forgetting and enabling compositional generalization on Level 2 and Level 3 scenarios. Furthermore, when the planning agent encounters novel subtasks, it invokes the tool generator to synthesize context-specific functionalities on the fly, bypass-ing the fixed-capability bottleneck of static agent toolkits. This dynamic tool creation and refinement loop, mediated entirely through the SEPL operator interface, ensures that new capabilities are version-tracked and reusable across subsequent tasks. In summary, GAIA confirms that AGP ’s self-evolution pro-9Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

tocol extends beyond pure reasoning tasks to complex, tool-intensive agent scenarios. The largest gains emerge on the hardest task tiers, where iterative tool refinement and hierar-chical resource management provide the most leverage. 

5.3. Experiments on Algorithmic Coding Benchmark 

5.3.1. E XPERIMENT SETTING 

Benchmark design rationale. Our benchmark construction is driven by three motivations: (i) evaluating inference-time self-evolution on executable code, (ii) calibrating agent per-formance against the distribution of human submissions, and (iii) assessing cross-language robustness under long-tail language usage. We build on top of the LeetCode online judge, which provides an execution-based evaluation inter-face and rich feedback signals. Specifically, acceptance status and per-test-case pass rates enable fine-grained as-sessment of functional correctness beyond binary success. For accepted submissions, the platform reports runtime and memory usage along with percentile-based runtime beats 

and memory beats statistics computed against the distribu-tion of human submissions, which directly supports human-referenced evaluation. Finally, LeetCode provides stan-dardized starter code across many programming languages, enabling consistent and reproducible multi-language evalua-tion under a unified protocol. 

Data collection. We collect the full set of 3,822 program-ming problems available on LeetCode at the time of crawl-ing. For each problem, we extract the natural-language statement, official input–output examples, and language-specific starter code templates. Each problem is annotated with its platform-provided difficulty label (Easy, Medium, Hard) and topical tags describing required algorithmic con-cepts (e.g., arrays, trees, dynamic programming). We per-form quality checks including filtering malformed records, removing duplicates, and validating successful parsing of statements, examples, and templates. From the full pool, we select 100 recently released test problems across diverse categories to mitigate training-data contamination. 

Evaluation protocol. We compare a vanilla baseline against 

AGS with evolve solution enabled. For the vanilla base-line, the agent presents a fixed input representation to the model, deterministically extracts executable source code, and submits it to the execution-based judge in a single pass. For AGS , the agent iteratively refines solutions through the SEPL reflection optimizer within a fixed revision budget of 3 rounds, while keeping the task specification and evaluation interface unchanged. This controlled setup enables direct comparison between one-shot generation and inference-time self-evolution on solution quality. We evaluate across five languages (Python3, C++, Java, Go, Kotlin) using multiple backbone models and report multi-dimensional metrics.                

> Table 4. Evaluation metrics for the algorithmic coding benchmark.
> Metric Description Capability metrics PR Number of problems passing all test cases within time and memory limits.
> TLE Number of problems exceeding the allowed exe-cution time limit.
> MLE Number of problems exceeding the allowed memory usage.
> CE Number of problems where generated code failed to compile.
> RE Number of problems encountering a runtime er-ror during execution.
> WA Number of problems producing incorrect output.
> TO Number of problems where the model failed to respond within the timeout.
> RpE Number of problems where the model returned an invalid or unparseable response.
> Efficiency metrics AR Mean runtime (ms) of accepted solutions.
> AM Mean memory (MB) of accepted solutions.
> APC Mean test cases passed before failure.
> Human-referenced metrics ARB Percentage of accepted solutions whose runtime outperforms human submissions.
> AMB Percentage of accepted solutions whose memory usage outperforms human submissions.

Metrics. As shown in Table 4, we report three groups of metrics that capture complementary aspects of coding performance. First, capability metrics measure functional correctness and failure modes under the judge constraints. Second, efficiency metrics summarize runtime and mem-ory cost for accepted submissions. Third, human metrics quantify how often accepted submissions outperform the distribution of human solutions in runtime and memory. The results in Table 3 and Figure 2 reveal four key findings across coding capability, efficiency, and human-referenced dimensions. (1) Self-evolution consistently improves pass rate across all languages. The evolve solution agent achieves relative pass-rate improvements ranging from 10.1% (Python3) to 26.7% (Kotlin), with compiled lan-guages benefiting most: C++ reaches 99 and Java 98 out of 100 problems. These gains are accompanied by broad reduc-tions in execution-blocking errors; compile error, runtime error, timeout, and response error frequently drop to zero, indicating that iterative refinement effectively repairs format and tooling issues that cause outright failures. Figure 2 (first row) corroborates this finding, showing consistently higher pass-rate trajectories for the evolving agent as problems ac-cumulate. (2) Evolution improves runtime efficiency but shows mixed memory effects. Average runtime decreases in every language, with reductions of 7.8% in Python3 and 19.8–46.4% in compiled languages. Figure 2 (second row) confirms this trend: the evolving agent accumulates sub-stantially lower cumulative runtime, and the gap widens as tasks accumulate. This pattern aligns with reductions in TLE errors, suggesting that reflection helps replace suboptimal al-10 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Table 3. Results based on gemini-3-flash-preview . Vanilla and evolve solution are reported; Improvement (%) denotes relative change. ↑ indicates gain; ↓ indicates degradation. 

Agent Capability metrics Efficiency metrics Human metrics PR TLE MLE CE RE WA TO RpE AR (ms) AM (MB) APC ARB (%) AMB (%) 

Python3 

vanilla 79 4 0 0 2 14 1 0 1376.19 56.59 750.89 73.28 36.62 evolve solution 87 3 0 0 1 9 0 0 1269.39 59.08 750.98 70.29 42.15 

Improvement (%) 10.1 ↑ 25.0 ↑ 0 0 50 ↑ 35.7 ↑ 100 ↑ 0 7.8 ↑ 4.4 ↓ 0.0 ↓ 4.1 ↓ 15.1 ↑

C++ 

vanilla 84 2 0 2 1 10 0 1 266.04 168.93 743.31 68.02 59.24 evolve solution 99 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 142.60 148.43 749.86 88.99 73.14 

Improvement (%) 17.9 ↑ 100 ↑ 0 100 ↑ 100 ↑ 90 ↑ 0 100 ↑ 46.4 ↑ 12.1 ↑ 0.9 ↓ 30.8 ↑ 23.5 ↑

Java 

vanilla 84 0 0 2 2 9 1 2 125.04 126.09 752.86 71.03 59.18 evolve solution 98 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 96.30 120.00 751.09 88.33 72.38 

Improvement (%) 16.7 ↑ 0 0 100 ↑ 100 ↑ 88.9 ↑ 100 ↑ 100 ↑ 23.0 ↑ 4.8 ↑ 0.2 ↑ 24.4 ↑ 22.3 ↑

Go 

vanilla 82 1 0 9 0 7 0 1 139.22 22.01 739.46 76.22 63.48 evolve solution 95 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 111.64 18.35 754.17 81.52 67.94 

Improvement (%) 15.9 ↑ 100 ↑ 0 100 ↑ 0 28.6 ↑ 0 100 ↑ 19.8 ↑ 16.6 ↑ 2.0 ↓ 7.0 ↑ 7.0 ↑

Kotlin 

vanilla 75 2 0 8 1 10 2 2 171.99 72.80 760.43 83.49 79.07 evolve solution 95 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 122.83 77.88 749.38 83.58 67.21 

Improvement (%) 26.7 ↑ 50 ↑ 0 100 ↑ 100 ↑ 60 ↑ 100 ↑ 100 ↑ 28.6 ↑ 7.0 ↓ 1.5 ↓ 0.1 ↑ 15.0 ↓

gorithms with more efficient ones. Memory usage, however, shows a mixed trend: it decreases in C++, Java, and Go but increases modestly in Python3 and Kotlin, plausibly because the evolving agent introduces auxiliary data structures to ensure correctness or improve speed. (3) Evolved solutions become more competitive against human submissions. 

Runtime beats (ARB) increase strongly in compiled lan-guages, with gains of 30.8% in C++ and 24.4% in Java, and smaller gains in Go (7.0%) and Kotlin (0.1%). Memory beats (AMB) increase in Python3, C++, Java, and Go, but decrease in Kotlin (15.0% ↓). Figure 2 (third row) shows that the evolving agent sustains higher ARB and AMB tra-jectories than the vanilla agent in most settings, indicating that competitiveness against human submissions improves consistently over the inference trajectory. The Kotlin diver-gence mirrors the absolute memory trend and suggests that in long-tail languages the evolving agent may trade memory for correctness or speed. (4) Within-inference trajectories reveal compounding improvement dynamics. Beyond endpoint metrics, Figure 2 enables trajectory-level analy-sis of self-evolution. Across all three metric groups, the gap between evolving and vanilla agents widens as prob-lems accumulate rather than plateauing, suggesting that the reflection-driven optimizer continues to find correctable fail-ure modes throughout the evaluation. This compounding behavior is most pronounced in the runtime panel, where cumulative efficiency gains accelerate in later problems. In summary, self-evolution on the algorithmic coding bench-mark delivers consistent improvements in functional cor-rectness and runtime efficiency across all five languages, with the largest gains in compiled languages where the type 0                 

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> PR (%)
> Python 3
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> C++
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Java
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Go
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Kotlin
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Cumul. Runtime (ms)  ×10 5
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8×10 4
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5 ×10 5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5 ×10 5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0 ×10 5
> 050 100
> Task Count
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> ARB & AMB (%)
> 050 100
> Task Count
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 050 100
> Task Count
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 050 100
> Task Count
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 050 100
> Task Count
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Evolving Vanllia Runtime Beats Memory Beats

Figure 2. Performance comparison of evolving and vanilla agents within-inference. 

system and compiler feedback provide richer signals for re-flection. Human-referenced metrics confirm that these gains translate into solutions that are increasingly competitive with human submissions. The within-inference trajectory analysis further demonstrates that AGP not only improves endpoint scores but also enables fine-grained visibility into when and how self-evolution provides the most leverage during a single inference episode. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We presented AGP , a two-layer self-evolution protocol that decouples what evolves from how evolution occurs . The Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL) models prompts, agents, tools, environments, and memory as first-class, ver-sioned resources with explicit lifecycle and interface con-11 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

tracts. The Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) specifies a closed-loop operator algebra for proposing, evaluating, and committing improvements with auditable lineage and rollback. Building on this protocol, we instantiated AGS , a thinking-and-action agent that dynamically retrieves, refines, and evolves heterogeneous resources during execution. We believe this protocol-level approach to self-evolution pro-vides a principled foundation for building modular, trace-able, and safely improvable agentic systems. 12 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

## References 

Anthropic. Equipping agents for the real world with agent skills. https:// www.anthropic.com/engineering/ equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skills ,2025a. Accessed October 2025. Anthropic. Introduction to agent skills. 

https://anthropic.skilljar.com/ introduction-to-agent-skills , October 2025b. Hu, J. Reinforce++: A simple and efficient approach for aligning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03262 , 2025a. Hu, J. Reinforce++: A simple and efficient approach for aligning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03262 , 2025b. LeetCode. Leetcode online judge. https://leetcode. com . Accessed 2025. Mialon, G., Fourrier, C., Wolf, T., LeCun, Y., and Scialom, T. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. Rein, D., Hou, B. L., Stickland, A. C., Petty, J., Pang, R. Y., Dirani, J., Michael, J., and Bowman, S. R. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y., Wu, Y., et al. Deepseekmath: Push-ing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Boen, J., Liu, S., Lu, P., Huang, Z., Guestrin, C., and Zou, J. Optimizing gener-ative ai by backpropagating language model feedback. 

Nature , 639(8055):609–616, 2025. 13 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

## A. Notation 

We summarize the main mathematical symbols and their meanings in Table 5. For readability, the notation is grouped by functional categories (grey rows), covering the RSPL substrate (resource entities, registration records, and registries) and the SEPL layer (evolvable variables, auxiliary spaces, and operator definitions used in the optimization loop). 

Table 5. Notation used in the paper. Grey rows indicate categories. 

Symbol Description 

Indexing and Sets 

T Set of RSPL entity types, {PROMPT , AGENT , TOOL , ENV , MEM }.

τ Entity type index, τ ∈ T .

Iτ Index set of resource instances of type τ .

i Instance index, i ∈ I τ .

V Space of version strings. 

℘(·) Power set operator. 

RSPL Resource Entity (Def. C.1) 

eτ,i Resource entity tuple (nτ,i , d τ,i , ϕ τ,i , g τ,i , m τ,i ).

nτ,i Unique resource name. 

dτ,i Short description. 

ϕτ,i : Xτ → Y τ Input-to-output mapping of the resource. 

gτ,i Trainable marker indicating whether the resource is evolvable. 

mτ,i Auxiliary metadata dictionary. 

Eτ Set of resource entities of type τ .

RSPL Registration Record (Def. C.2) 

cτ,i Registration record (eτ,i , v τ,i , η τ,i , θ τ,i , Fτ,i ).

Cτ Set of registration records for type τ .

vτ,i Version string of the resource instance. 

ητ,i Implementation descriptor (e.g., import path, class, or source). 

θτ,i Instantiation parameters (e.g., constructor arguments). 

Fτ,i Exported representations for LLM interaction (schemas/text/structured args). 

Protocol-registered Resource (Def. C.3) 

Rτ Type-specific registry of protocol-registered resources. 

R Global registry, S 

> τ

Rτ .

Mτ Context manager for type τ (maintains registry and version lineage). 

Aτ Server-exposed interface for type τ (delegates to Mτ ). 

rτ Type-level registered resource triple (Cτ , Mτ , Aτ ).

SEPL Variables, Spaces, and Operators 

Vevo Universal set of evolvable variables (all managed entities plus execution artifacts). 

v A variable in Vevo .

gv Learnability constraint for variable v (binary). 

Θ Trainable subspace, {v ∈ V evo | gv = 1 }.

y Execution artifacts (e.g., outputs and reasoning traces). 

Z Trace space. 

H Hypothesis space. 

D Modification space. 

G Objective specification. 

S Evaluation space (metrics and safety status). 

ρ, σ, ι, ε, κ Reflect, Select, Improve, Evaluate, and Commit operators. 

Optimization Loop (Alg. 1) 

A Agentic system. 

T Optimization budget (number of iterations). 

t Iteration index. 

V(t) 

> evo

Evolvable state at iteration t.

Z(t) Observational trace at iteration t.

H(t) Hypotheses at iteration t.

D(t) Proposed modifications at iteration t.

eV(t+1)  

> evo

Candidate state after applying modifications. 

S(t+1) Evaluation result for the candidate state. 

14 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

## B. Comparison with Other Protocols 

We provide a structured comparison between Autogenesis , Google A2A, and Anthropic MCP in Table 6. The goal of this comparison is to position Autogenesis relative to widely used protocol abstractions in agent tooling, and to clarify which protocol-level primitives are required to make self-evolution composable, auditable, and safe in practice. Accordingly, the comparison is organized into four high-level dimensions (grey rows): Basic Information , Agent and System Capabilities , Evolvable Resource Management , and Self-Evolution Mechanism . Blue-highlighted entries emphasize the specific capabilities that enable closed-loop improvement (e.g., lifecycle control, version lineage, contract generation, and operatorized updates), which are not directly addressed by communication- or invocation-centric protocols.                                                                 

> Table 6. Protocol-level comparison: Autogenesis vs. Google A2A vs. Anthropic MCP across key dimensions for agentic systems and self-evolution. Symbols: ✓= Supported, △= Partial, ×= Not supported. Highlighted rows (blue background) emphasize evolution-enabling capabilities.
> Dimension Autogenesis A2A MCP
> Basic Information
> Proposer Our work Google Anthropic
> Protocol Focus Self-evolution Agentic System Multi-agent System Collaboration Tool
> Entity Scope Prompt/Agent/Tool/Env/Memory Agent/Tool Tool
> Agent and System Capabilities
> Agent First-Class ✓✓×
> Multi-Agent ✓✓×
> Tracer ✓△×
> Memory as Resource ✓××
> Evolvable Resource Management
> Lifecycle Ops ✓△×
> Versioning and Rollback ✓××
> Registry and Retrieval ✓△△
> Contract Generation ✓△×
> Self-Evolution Mechanism
> Closed-Loop Evolution ✓××
> Operatorized Updates ✓××
> Auditability ✓△△
> General and Ecosystem
> Model-Agnostic ✓✓✓
> Scalability O(log n)O(n2)O(n)
> Open Ecosystem ✓△△

B.1. Basic Information Proposer : This dimension identifies the originating organization and design context of each protocol. Google’s A2A is introduced as part of an agent communication framework, focusing on enabling agents to collaborate via standardized interaction primitives. Anthropic’s MCP (Model Context Protocol) is designed to standardize how LLMs connect to external tools and resources. Autogenesis is proposed in this work as a protocol for systematic self-evolution , targeting composable, auditable, and updateable agentic systems. 

Protocol Focus : This dimension describes the primary interaction patterns and control plane each protocol standardizes. Autogenesis focuses on enabling closed-loop improvement of agentic systems by organizing resources and updates through protocol operators and versioned state. A2A focuses on multi-agent collaboration and communication. MCP focuses on standardizing model-to-tool (and resource) invocation interfaces. 

Entity Scope : This dimension defines what is treated as first-class, protocol-governed components. Autogenesis explicitly manages heterogeneous entities (e.g., prompts, agents, tools, environments, and memory) as protocol-registered resources with explicit state and lineage, which is necessary for component-level evolution (e.g., prompt refinement, tool/code updates). A2A centers around agents (and their interactions), and typically does not establish tools/environments/memory as unified 15 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

managed entities. MCP treats tools/resources as callable interfaces for LLMs, but does not natively model them as evolvable components with lifecycle and version lineage. 

B.2. Agent and System Capabilities Agent First-Class : First-class support means agents are modeled as managed protocol components with explicit schemas, metadata, and lifecycle hooks (enabling registration, discovery, orchestration, and controlled updates). Autogenesis supports agents as first-class resources. A2A provides agent-centric collaboration but often treats agents as service endpoints without unified lifecycle/version lineage. MCP does not define agents as protocol components, focusing instead on model-to-tool connectivity. 

Multi-Agent : This dimension captures whether the protocol natively supports multi-agent composition beyond ad-hoc application logic. Autogenesis supports multi-agent configurations as part of a broader system substrate, enabling coordinated execution with traceability and evolution-ready state. A2A provides direct support for agent-to-agent collaboration. MCP does not address multi-agent orchestration as a protocol concern. 

Tracer/Observability : Observability refers to whether the protocol provides native mechanisms to record execution traces (inputs/outputs, intermediate decisions, tool calls, state transitions) for debugging, evaluation, and learning signals. Autogenesis includes protocol-level tracing to support auditable evolution. A2A and MCP typically leave tracing to application-level implementations, which can lead to inconsistent observability. 

Memory as Resource : This dimension reflects whether memory is explicitly modeled and managed as a protocol-level com-ponent. Autogenesis treats memory as a first-class resource (e.g., readable/writable state with explicit interfaces), enabling persistent improvement and reproducible evolution. A2A and MCP generally do not prescribe a memory management protocol, leaving memory to external systems. 

B.3. Evolvable Resource Management Lifecycle Ops : Lifecycle operations refer to standardized procedures for initializing, registering, constructing, and decom-missioning protocol-managed components. Autogenesis provides explicit lifecycle operators so that updates can be applied safely to well-defined targets. A2A and MCP do not provide comprehensive lifecycle management across heterogeneous component types. 

Versioning and Rollback : Version lineage and rollback provide the foundation for safe evolution: every update yields an auditable snapshot, supports comparison, and enables restoration when regressions occur. Autogenesis integrates version management as a protocol capability. A2A and MCP do not natively support version lineage for protocol-managed components, making systematic evolution difficult. 

Registry and Retrieval : This dimension captures whether the protocol supports unified registration, listing, and retrieval of components (optionally via semantic search) to enable reuse and scalable coordination. Autogenesis maintains a registry of protocol-registered components and supports retrieval to reduce duplication and improve composability. A2A and MCP provide partial discovery mechanisms but do not define a unified management plane over heterogeneous components. 

Contract Generation : Contract generation refers to producing consolidated, up-to-date capability and constraint specifica-tions (e.g., tool actions, arguments, preconditions, usage constraints) for reliable orchestration and reduced prompt bloat. Autogenesis supports contract generation as a systematic form of context engineering. A2A and MCP generally rely on static descriptions or application-layer documentation without protocol-level contract aggregation. 

B.4. Self-Evolution Mechanism Closed-Loop Evolution : Closed-loop evolution means the protocol supports an iterative improvement loop (execute →

diagnose → propose → verify → commit) rather than one-off adaptation. Autogenesis is explicitly designed around this loop to enable sustained improvement. A2A and MCP do not provide a native self-evolution loop. 

Operatorized Updates : This dimension captures whether system updates are expressed as a typed, composable operator interface (rather than ad-hoc scripts), enabling controlled state transitions and repeatable evolution. Autogenesis defines self-evolution as operator-mediated transitions over protocol-managed resources. A2A and MCP do not define an operator algebra for evolution. 16 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Auditability : Auditability means that system changes are traceable and reviewable: what changed, why it changed, under what evidence, and with what evaluation outcome. Autogenesis emphasizes auditability through versioned lineage and trace-based evaluation signals. A2A and MCP provide only partial audit trails via external tooling rather than protocol-level guarantees. 

B.5. General and Ecosystem Model-Agnostic : This dimension captures whether the protocol can work across different LLM backends and providers. Autogenesis is model-agnostic by design via a unified model interface layer. A2A and MCP are also broadly model-agnostic as they define interaction standards rather than binding to a specific model. 

Scalability : Scalability reflects how coordination and discovery behave as the number of components grows. Autogenesis supports scalable management by treating heterogeneous components as registry-governed resources with retrieval mecha-nisms, enabling efficient lookup and controlled orchestration. A2A may face coordination overhead as interactions densify in large multi-agent settings. MCP standardizes tool interfaces but may still rely on application-level orchestration for large tool/resource sets. 

Open Ecosystem : Open ecosystem support refers to whether the protocol can enable a reusable ecosystem of interoperable components. Autogenesis provides a full protocol stack for managing, evolving, and auditing agentic components, which supports component sharing and safe integration. A2A and MCP offer partial ecosystem enablement focused on interoperability or tool interfaces, typically requiring additional layers for evolution-ready management. 

## C. Details of Self-Evolution Protocol 

C.1. Layer 1: Resource Substrate Protocol Layer 

The Resource Substrate Protocol Layer (RSPL) defines the evolvable substrate as a set of protocol-registered resources with explicit state, lifecycle, and version lineage. In this paper, these resources comprise (i) instructions (Prompt ), (ii) decision policies ( Agent ), (iii) actuation interfaces ( Tool ), which encompass native tool scripts, MCP tools (Anthropic, 2025a), and agent skills (Anthropic, 2025b), (iv) task/world dynamics ( Environment ), and (v) persistent state ( Memory ). Crucially, resources in RSPL are passive : they encapsulate no optimization logic and cannot self-modify; all observations and state transitions occur only through controlled, interface-mediated operations invoked by higher layers. C.1.1. C ORE ENTITIES 

We focus on these five entity types as a minimal yet expressive substrate for agentic systems. This choice is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to identify a common denominator across modern agent stacks and provide a uniform target space on which SEPL can operate. 

Definition C.1 (Resource Entity) . A resource entity of type τ and its type-level collection can be represented as: 

eτ,i = ( nτ,i , d τ,i , ϕ τ,i , g τ,i , m τ,i ),

Eτ = { eτ,i | i ∈ I τ }, (5) where T = {PROMPT , AGENT , TOOL , ENV , MEM } denotes the set of RSPL entity types, τ ∈ T indexes the entity type, 

Iτ is the index set of resource instances of type τ , and i ∈ I τ indexes an individual instance. Here nτ,i is a unique resource name, dτ,i is a short description, ϕτ,i : Xτ → Y τ is an input-to-output mapping, gτ,i ∈ { 0, 1} is the trainable marker that indicates whether the resource is evolvable, and mτ,i is an auxiliary metadata dictionary. A key motivation for making prompt, tool, and memory explicit RSPL resources is decoupling . Many agent systems package prompts, tools, and memory as internal components of an agent, which entangles agent logic with task-specific instructions and capability bundles, increasing maintenance and limiting transfer. By externalizing them as first-class, versioned resources with standardized interfaces, the same tool-calling agent policy can be paired with different prompts and tool sets, and deployed unchanged across tasks and environments. To support resource registration, unified management, and instantiation, RSPL stores a serializable registration record for each resource instance. 

Definition C.2 (Resource Registration Record) . A resource registration record and its type-level collection can be represented 17 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

as: cτ,i = ( eτ,i , v τ,i , η τ,i , θ τ,i , Fτ,i ),

Cτ = { cτ,i | i ∈ I τ }, (6) where τ ∈ T indexes the entity type and i ∈ I τ indexes an individual instance. Here eτ,i is the resource entity tuple defined in Theorem C.1, vτ,i ∈ V is a version string, ητ,i is an implementation descriptor (e.g., import path, class definition, or source-code string), θτ,i are instantiation parameters (e.g., constructor arguments), and Fτ,i is a set of exported representations used by LLMs to interact with the resource (e.g., function-calling schema, natural-language text, and structured argument schema). 

Definition C.3 (Protocol-registered resource) . For each entity type τ , let Rτ denote the type-specific registry of protocol-registered resources, and let R = S 

> τ

Rτ denote the global registry. RSPL binds each entity type τ to a dedicated context manager Mτ and a server-exposed interface Aτ . We represent the type-level registered resource as 

rτ = ( Cτ , Mτ , Aτ ), (7) where each cτ,i ∈ C τ is a registration record in Theorem C.2. The context manager Mτ maintains the collection Cτ , the version lineage for type τ , and implements lifecycle and update operations over these records; the server-exposed interface 

Aτ encapsulates Mτ and exposes a unified external interface by delegating requests to the corresponding context-manager routines. C.1.2. C ONTEXT MANAGER 

The context manager implements the management plane for each resource type. Beyond lifecycle control and dependency constraints, it maintains (i) an active registry of materialized resources and (ii) a versioned history for restoration. Its exported API can be viewed as a small set of functionally grouped operators for lifecycle and registration (e.g., init , build ), retrieval and inspection (e.g., list , get state ), evolution and versioning (e.g., update , restore ), execution and contract (e.g., run , load contract ), and serialization and deserialization (e.g., save to json , load from json ). The manager explicitly supports contract generation , producing a consolidated capability and constraint specification for the managed entities, which provides stable, up-to-date descriptions that improve reliability and reduce prompt bloat, enabling systematic context engineering via controlled prompt injection. For instance, for tools (which may be native tool scripts, MCP-connected tools (Anthropic, 2025a), or agent skills) the contract can take a skills.md -style form (Anthropic, 2025b) that enumerates tool actions, arguments, preconditions, and usage constraints. The exported management interface implemented by Mτ and exposed by Aτ are as follows: C.1.3. S ERVER INTERFACE 

The server is introduced to encapsulate the context manager’s internal complexity and present a stable, simplified interface for external callers. It packages heterogeneous management routines behind a uniform set of endpoints with consistent request/response semantics, while delegating the implementation details to the context manager. This separation isolates clients from internal design changes, reduces coupling, and provides a single control plane through which the protocol mediates safe, version-aware interactions with RSPL resources. C.1.4. I NFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES 

RSPL further includes cross-cutting services that support reliable evolution, including reproducibility, safe deployment, and versioned recovery: 

Model manager. A unified model-API layer that standardizes calls across providers (e.g., OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and OpenRouter, etc.), while supporting routing, fallback, and cost-aware selection to keep model access consistent as components evolve. 

Version manager. Maintains version lineage for each resource, enabling rollback, branching, and diffing. Versions are auto-incremented identifiers (e.g., semantic versions) assigned on register or update, each referencing an immutable snapshot of the configuration record and associated artifacts for auditability and reproducibility. 

Dynamic manager. Handles serialization or deserialization of resource configurations for persistence and transfer, enabling safe hot-swapping of resources at runtime without restarting the agent system. 18 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol                      

> Table 7. Operator set of Context Manager and Server Interface.
> Operator Description Lifecycle & Registration
> init Auto discover resources and register the resource configuration to the registry.
> build Build a resource instance from code and configuration.
> register Register a new resource instance with a unique name and version.
> unregister Unregister a resource instance from the active registry and version history.
> Retrieval & Inspection
> get Retrieve a resource instance by name from the active registry.
> get info Retrieve a resource configuration by name from the active registry.
> list List all registered resource names.
> retrieve Retrieve similar resources via semantic search when supported.
> get state Get the current state of a resource instance when supported.
> Evolution & Versioning
> update Update a resource implementation and generate a new version.
> copy Duplicate a resource with an optional new name and version.
> restore Restore a specific historical version by name and version string.
> get variables Expose resource code/configuration as evolvable variables.
> set variables Update resource variables and generate a new version.
> Execution & Contract
> run Run a resource instance with structured input.
> save contract Save the contract of a resource instance to a file.
> load contract Load the contract of a resource instance from a file.
> Serialization & Deserialization
> save to json Serialize configurations and version history to a JSON file.
> load from json Deserialize configurations and version history from a JSON file.

Tracer Module. A module that captures fine-grained execution traces (inputs, outputs, intermediate decisions, tool interactions, etc.) for interpretability and debugging, and as training signals for dataset synthesis and retrospective improvement. 

C.2. Layer 2: Self-Evolution Protocol Layer 

The Self-Evolution Protocol Layer (SEPL) specifies how an agentic system can improve itself through a principled closed-loop operator interface. SEPL frames self-improvement as iterative state transitions over a heterogeneous evolvable state, while routing all modifications through standardized RSPL interfaces so that updates remain auditable (versioned), reversible (restorable), and safe by construction. C.2.1. O VERVIEW 

SEPL conceptualizes continuous improvement as a generalized optimization problem over a structured evolvable state space. Formally, SEPL treats evolutionary dynamics as state transitions governed by a strictly typed operator algebra, enabling different optimization strategies to share the same mutation surface and safety/verification gates. In our system, SEPL admits multiple instantiations—including reflection-driven optimization (our default), TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2025), GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), and Reinforce++ (Hu, 2025b). We do not expand their full mechanics in this overview; instead, we summarize their variables, operators, and loop procedures in dedicated subsections below. C.2.2. E VOLVABLE VARIABLES 

SEPL relies on variable lifting to project heterogeneous RSPL resources (e.g., prompts, tool implementations (native scripts, MCP tools, or agent skills), and memory modules) into a unified evolvable variable space. This abstraction provides a common interface for all evolution operators and makes the learnable subspace explicit via a binary learnability mask. We refer readers to the main text (SEPL, Evolvable Variables , Definition “Evolvable Variable Set”) for the formal definition of 

Vevo and the associated learnability constraint. 19 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

C.2.3. O PERATOR ALGEBRA 

SEPL formalizes evolution as a composition of typed operators over auxiliary spaces, aligning with the canonical phases of iterative optimization (observation, attribution, proposal, verification, and commit). We adopt the reflection-driven instantiation in the main text as the canonical example: it specifies a minimal operator suite {ρ, σ, ι, ε, κ } (Re-flect/Select/Improve/Evaluate/Commit) operating over the trace, hypothesis, modification, objective, and evaluation spaces 

(Z, H, D, G, S). We refer readers to the main text ( Operator Algebra ) for the formal operator signatures and their semantics; below we provide method-specific operatorizations for TextGrad, GRPO, and Reinforce++ in addition to reflection. C.2.4. R EFLECTION OPTIMIZER 

Evolvable Variables. In the reflection-driven instantiation, the evolvable state is given by the lifted variable set Vevo 

introduced in the main text (SEPL, Evolvable Variables ). Concretely, Vevo includes RSPL-managed resources (e.g., prompts, tools, memories, and agent components) together with execution artifacts (e.g., the produced answer and reasoning trace). A binary learnability mask specifies which variables may be modified, allowing the optimizer to target only authorized components while keeping non-learnable resources fixed. 

Operator Algebra. We instantiate SEPL with the canonical reflection-driven operator suite in the main text ( Operator Algebra ). For completeness, we restate the operator signatures and their intended roles below. • Reflect ( ρ). Defined as ρ : Z × V evo → ℘(H), this operator bridges the gap between raw observation and optimization direction. It approximates the “semantic gradient” of the system by mapping high-dimensional execution traces to specific, causal failure hypotheses within the variable space. • Select ( σ). Formulated as σ : Vevo × ℘(H) → ℘(D), this operator acts as the generative policy. It translates diagnostic hypotheses into concrete update proposals, sampling candidate modifications D designed to minimize the identified error signal subject to structural constraints. • Improve ( ι). The mutation operator, ι : Vevo × ℘(D) → V ′

> evo

, executes the physical state transition. It applies discrete updates D via standardized RSPL interfaces to yield a provisional candidate state. • Evaluate ( ε). Specified as ε : V′ 

> evo

× G → S , this operator serves as the objective function. It maps the candidate state and goal specification to the evaluation space S (comprising quantitative scores and strict safety invariants). • Commit ( κ). Operating as κ : V′ 

> evo

× S → V evo , this function acts as a conditional gating mechanism. It utilizes the evaluation signals in S to govern state transition, rigorously enforcing safety invariants and performance monotonicity by accepting the candidate V′ 

> evo

only when specific success criteria are met. 

The Evolutionary Loop. These operators are composed into the reflection-driven closed-loop procedure shown in Algorithm 2. Starting from an initial lifted state V(0)  

> evo

, the agent first executes to collect an observational trace Z (tool outputs, intermediate decisions, failures, and progress signals). The reflect operator ρ maps Z to a set of causal hypotheses 

H, which are then translated by σ into concrete modification primitives D (e.g., prompt edits, tool adjustments, or memory updates) over the learnable subset of Vevo . The improve operator ι applies D via RSPL interfaces to obtain a candidate state, which is evaluated by ε to produce S capturing both performance metrics and safety constraints. Finally, the commit operator κ gates the transition by accepting only candidates that satisfy the predefined criteria, recording each accepted change as a versioned resource update with auditable lineage and enabling rollback when necessary. C.2.5. T EXT GRAD OPTIMIZER 

Evolvable Variables. In the TextGrad instantiation, the evolvable variables are restricted to a subset of prompt variables 

marked as optimizable and lifted into TextGrad variables with explicit role descriptions. In our implementation, each optimizable prompt module is represented as a TextGrad variable whose value is the current prompt text and whose role description specifies the prompt’s function, enabling the optimizer to condition updates on its intended semantics. 

Operator Algebra. TextGrad instantiates SEPL with a prompt-level operatorization in which “gradients” are natural-language critiques produced by an LLM evaluator and updates are implemented as constrained prompt rewrites. Following the standard TextGrad view, we express the method with five core operators, namely Execute , Loss , Backward , Improve , and 

Commit , where the “gradient” is a piece of text (a critique) rather than a numeric vector: • Execute ( χtg ). χtg : ( A, Vevo , x, f ) → Z runs the agent under the current prompt variables and produces an execution trace/outcome. • Loss ( λtg ). λtg : Z → G tg , where Gtg is a space of natural-language critiques (textual gradients). In our implementation, 20 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Algorithm 2 Reflection Optimizer Evolutionary Loop 

Input: Agentic System A, Objective G, Budget T

Output: Optimized state V∗

> evo

1: Initialization: 

2: V(0)  

> evo

← VariableLifting (A) ▷ Project resources to optimization manifold 

3: Z(0) ← Execute (A, V(0)  

> evo

) ▷ Trace: tool I/O, failures, latencies, progress 

4: Optimization Cycle: 

5: for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T − 1 do 

6: // Phase 1: Diagnosis & Proposal 

7: H(t) ← ρ(Z(t), V(t) 

> evo

) ▷ Reflect: attribute failures / inefficiencies 

8: D(t) ← σ(V(t) 

> evo

, H(t)) ▷ Select: propose edits over learnable variables 

9: // Phase 2: Mutation & Verification 

10: eV(t+1)  

> evo

← ι(V(t) 

> evo

, D(t)) ▷ Improve: apply proposed updates (candidate) 

11: S(t+1) ← ε(eV(t+1)  

> evo

, G) ▷ Evaluate: metrics + safety invariants 

12: // Phase 3: Gating & Transition 

13: if Accept (S(t+1) ) then 

14: // Accept: safe & non-degrading 

15: V(t+1)  

> evo

← κ(eV(t+1)  

> evo

, S(t+1) ) ▷ Commit: versioned update 

16: else 

17: // Reject: rollback / keep previous state 

18: V(t+1)  

> evo

← V (t)

> evo

19: end if 

20: // Phase 4: Next Iteration 

21: Z(t+1) ← Execute (A, V(t+1)  

> evo

) ▷ Re-run under updated resources 

22: if Converged (S(t+1) ) then 

23: break 

24: end if 

25: end for 

26: return V(t)

> evo

λtg is realized by TextLoss , which queries an evaluator LLM and returns critique feedback. • Backward ( βtg ). βtg : Vevo × G tg → V evo assigns textual gradients to optimizable prompt variables by storing the critique (optionally with context) in a per-variable gradient buffer. In our current implementation, we distribute the same critique to each optimizable prompt variable for stability. • Improve ( ιtg ). ιtg : Vevo → V ′ 

> evo

rewrites prompt variables via a textual-gradient-descent step: it constructs an update instruction from each variable’s role description, current value, and accumulated textual gradients, then queries an optimizer LLM and extracts the improved variable text from a constrained output format. • Commit ( κtg ). κtg : V′ 

> evo

→ V evo synchronizes the updated prompt variables back into the running agent and clears caches, completing the state transition. 

The Evolutionary Loop. Algorithm 3 presents the full TextGrad optimization cycle in operator form. At each iteration, the agent is executed under the current prompt variables to obtain a trace Z via χtg , an LLM-based evaluator produces a natural-language critique g ∈ G tg via λtg , the critique is assigned as a textual gradient to the optimizable prompt variables via βtg , the prompt variables are improved via ιtg using textual-gradient-descent, and the candidate state is committed via 

κtg to synchronize the updated prompts back into the running agent (and clear caches) before the next iteration. C.2.6. R EINFORCE ++ O PTIMIZER 

Evolvable Variables. Reinforce++ optimizes a trainable subset of RSPL resources, focusing on prompt variables and tool implementations (native scripts, MCP tools (Anthropic, 2025a), and agent skills (Anthropic, 2025b)), and optionally refining the produced solution text. Our implementation follows a two stage structure: (i) update trainable variables that govern behavior (e.g., prompts and tools), and (ii) update the solution itself when enabled. 21 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Algorithm 3 TextGrad Prompt Optimization Loop 

Input: Agentic System A, task x, attachments f (optional), Budget K, evaluator/optimizer LLMs Meval , M opt 

Output: Updated state V∗ 

> evo

(prompt variables updated via TextGrad) 

1: // Phase 0: Setup 

2: Set backward engine to Meval ▷ Evaluator used by TextLoss 

3: V(0)  

> evo

← VariableLifting (A) ▷ Lift optimizable prompts to TextGrad variables 

4: Initialize textual optimizer with Mopt ▷ TextualGradientDescent over prompt vars 

5: // Optimization Cycle 

6: for k = 0 , 1, . . . , K − 1 do 

7: // Phase 1: Execute (Forward) 

8: Z(k) ← χtg (A, V(k) 

> evo

, x, f ) ▷ Run agent with current prompts 

9: // Phase 2: Loss (Textual Gradient) 

10: Build evaluation instruction from Z(k) ▷ Condition on success/error 

11: g(k) ← λtg (Z(k)) ▷ TextLoss produces critique string 

12: // Phase 3: Backward (Assign Gradients) 

13: V(k) 

> evo

← βtg (V(k) 

> evo

, g (k)) ▷ Assign critique to gradient buffers 

14: // Phase 4: Improve (Textual Gradient Descent) 

15: eV(k+1)  

> evo

← ιtg (V(k) 

> evo

) ▷ Rewrite prompts via textual GD 

16: // Phase 5: Commit & Next Iteration 

17: V(k+1)  

> evo

← κtg (eV(k+1)  

> evo

) ▷ Sync back; clear caches 

18: if Converged (g(k)) then 

19: break 

20: end if 

21: end for 

22: return V(k)

> evo

Operator Algebra. Reinforce++ is characterized by a clipped objective with an explicit penalty to a reference solution, while using reflection to translate RL signals into concrete edits. We group the method into a small set of core operators: • Sample ( χrpp ). χrpp : ( A, Vevo , x, f ) → Z samples a rollout under the current resources and yields an execution trace containing the produced answer. • Reward ( εrpp ). εrpp : ( y(t), y (t−1) , y ∗, y sft ) → (r(t), A (t), J (t), ρ (t)) computes the RL signal tuple from the current solution y(t). Here r(t) is a task reward comparing y(t) with y∗, and ρ(t) is a ratio surrogate defined by a text similarity 

η(·, ·) as ρ(t) ≜ η(y(t−1) , y (t)). We define a penalty to a reference solution ysft as pen (t) ≜ β log max( η(ysft , y (t)), ϵ 0)

and set A(t) ≜ r(t) − pen (t). The clipped Reinforce++ objective is 

J(t) ≜ min  ρ(t)A(t), ¯ρ(t)A(t), ¯ρ(t) ≜ clip( ρ(t), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ).

• Reflection ( ρrpp ). ρrpp : ( Z, Vtrain , r (t), A (t), J (t), ρ (t)) → H produces an edit oriented diagnosis that is explicitly conditioned on the RL metrics and the execution trace. • Improve ( ιrpp ). ιrpp : ( V, H) → V ′ 

> evo

applies RL informed edits to either (i) the trainable resources Vtrain such as prompts and tools, or (ii) the solution variable itself when solution refinement is enabled, yielding a candidate state. • Commit ( κrpp ). κrpp : V′ 

> evo

→ V evo applies accepted updates back to RSPL resources, completing the state transition. 

The Evolutionary Loop. Algorithm 4 summarizes the Reinforce++ loop in a phased form. Each iteration (i) computes Reinforce++ signals via the clipped objective and the penalty to the reference solution, (ii) improves trainable resources through RL conditioned reflection and edits, (iii) optionally improves the solution text, and (iv) applies an early stopping evaluation. C.2.7. GRPO O PTIMIZER 

Evolvable Variables. GRPO optimizes a trainable subset of RSPL resources, focusing on prompt variables and tool implementations (native scripts, MCP tools (Anthropic, 2025a), and agent skills (Anthropic, 2025b)), and optionally refining the produced solution text. Similar to Reinforce++, our implementation follows a two stage structure: (i) update trainable 22 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Algorithm 4 Reinforce++ Optimization Loop 

Input: Agentic System A, task x, ground truth y∗, reference solution ysft , Budget T

Output: Final solution y(t) and updated trainable resources Vtrain 

1: // Initialization 

2: V(0)  

> evo

← VariableLifting (A) ▷ Lift trainable resources 

3: Z(0) ← χrpp (A, V(0)  

> evo

, x, f ) ▷ Sample once 

4: Extract solution y(0) from Z(0) 

5: y(−1) ← y(0) ▷ Initialize previous solution 

6: for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T − 1 do 

7: // Phase 1: Reinforce++ reward and objective 

8: (r(t), A (t), J (t), ρ (t)) ← εrpp (y(t), y (t−1) , y ∗, y sft ) ▷ Reward, penalty, clipped objective 

9: // Phase 2: Improve trainable resources (prompt and tool) 

10: V(t) 

> train

← GetTrainables (V(t) 

> evo

)

11: H(t) 

> train

← ρrpp (Z(t), V(t)

> train

, r (t), A (t), J (t), ρ (t)) ▷ Reflection conditioned on RL signals 

12: eV(t+1)  

> train

← ιrpp (V(t)

> train

, H(t)

> train

) ▷ Apply edits to trainables (candidate) 

13: V(t+1)  

> train

← κrpp (eV(t+1)  

> train

) ▷ Commit updates 

14: // Phase 3: Re run under updated resources 

15: Z(t+1) ← χrpp (A, V(t) 

> evo

∪ V (t+1)  

> train

, x, f )

16: Extract solution y(t+1) from Z(t+1) 

17: // Phase 4: Optional solution refinement 

18: H(t) 

> sol

← ρrpp (Z(t+1) , {y(t+1) }, r (t), A (t), J (t), ρ (t)) ▷ Reflect on solution quality 

19: ey(t+1) ← ιrpp (y(t+1) , H(t) 

> sol

) ▷ Edit solution text (candidate) 

20: y(t+1) ← κrpp (ey(t+1) ) ▷ Commit solution update 

21: // Phase 5: Early stopping 

22: if Satisfied (Z(t+1) ) then 

23: break 

24: end if 

25: y(t) ← y(t+1) ▷ Advance current solution 

26: end for 

27: return y(t)

variables that govern behavior (e.g., prompts and tools), and (ii) update the solution itself when enabled. 

Operator Algebra. GRPO is characterized by sampling multiple candidate solutions per step and using group normalized advantages with a clipped objective. We formalize the method with the following core operators: • Sample ( χgrpo ). χgrpo : ( A, Vevo , x, f, K ) → {Z i}Ki=1 samples K independent rollouts under the current resources, yielding K execution traces each containing a candidate solution yi.• Reward ( εgrpo ). εgrpo : ( {yi}Ki=1 , y ∗, y (t−1) ) → ({ri}Ki=1 , {Ai}Ki=1 , {Ji}Ki=1 , {ρi}Ki=1 ) computes RL signals for all 

K candidates. For each candidate yi, we compute a task reward ri comparing yi with y∗, a policy ratio surrogate 

ρi ≜ η(y(t−1) , y i) using text similarity η(·, ·), and a group normalized advantage Ai by normalizing rewards across the candidate set: Ai = ( ri − ¯r)/σ r where ¯r and σr are the mean and standard deviation of {ri}Ki=1 . The GRPO clipped objective for each candidate is 

Ji ≜ min  ρiAi, ¯ρiAi

, ¯ρi ≜

(

min( ρi, 1 + ϵ) if Ai ≥ 0max( ρi, 1 − ϵ) if Ai < 0 .

• Reflection ( ρgrpo ). ρgrpo : ( {Z i}Ki=1 , Vtrain , {ri, A i, J i, ρ i}Ki=1 ) → H produces an edit oriented diagnosis that is explicitly conditioned on the multiple candidate solutions and their RL metrics, enabling the optimizer to identify patterns across candidates. • Improve ( ιgrpo ). ιgrpo : ( V, H) → V ′ 

> evo

applies RL informed edits to either (i) the trainable resources Vtrain such as prompts and tools, or (ii) the solution variable itself when solution refinement is enabled, yielding a candidate state. 23 Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol 

Algorithm 5 GRPO Optimization Loop 

Input: Agentic System A, task x, ground truth y∗, Budget T , number of candidates K

Output: Final solution y(t) and updated trainable resources Vtrain 

1: // Initialization 

2: V(0)  

> evo

← VariableLifting (A) ▷ Lift trainable resources 

3: Z(0) ← χgrpo (A, V(0)  

> evo

, x, f, 1) ▷ Sample initial solution 

4: Extract solution y(0) from Z(0) 

5: y(−1) ← y(0) ▷ Initialize previous solution 

6: for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T − 1 do 

7: // Phase 1: Sample multiple candidates 

8: {Z (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 ← χgrpo (A, V(t) 

> evo

, x, f, K ) ▷ Sample K rollouts 

9: Extract candidate solutions {y(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 from {Z (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 

10: // Phase 2: GRPO reward and objective 

11: ({r(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , {A(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , {J(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , {ρ(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 ) ← εgrpo ({y(t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , y ∗, y (t−1) ) ▷ Group normalized advantages, clipped objectives 

12: // Phase 3: Improve trainable resources (prompt and tool) 

13: V(t) 

> train

← GetTrainables (V(t) 

> evo

)

14: H(t) 

> train

← ρgrpo ({Z (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , V(t)

> train

, {r(t) 

> i

, A (t) 

> i

, J (t) 

> i

, ρ (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 ) ▷ Reflection conditioned on multi candidate RL signals 

15: eV(t+1)  

> train

← ιgrpo (V(t)

> train

, H(t)

> train

) ▷ Apply edits to trainables (candidate) 

16: V(t+1)  

> train

← κgrpo (eV(t+1)  

> train

) ▷ Commit updates 

17: // Phase 4: Re run under updated resources 

18: Z(t+1) ← χgrpo (A, V(t) 

> evo

∪ V (t+1)  

> train

, x, f, 1) 

19: Extract solution y(t+1) from Z(t+1) 

20: // Phase 5: Optional solution refinement 

21: H(t) 

> sol

← ρgrpo ({Z (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 , {y(t+1) }, {r(t) 

> i

, A (t) 

> i

, J (t) 

> i

, ρ (t) 

> i

}Ki=1 ) ▷ Reflect on solution quality using multi candidate context 

22: ey(t+1) ← ιgrpo (y(t+1) , H(t) 

> sol

) ▷ Edit solution text (candidate) 

23: y(t+1) ← κgrpo (ey(t+1) ) ▷ Commit solution update 

24: // Phase 6: Early stopping 

25: if Satisfied (Z(t+1) ) then 

26: break 

27: end if 

28: y(t) ← y(t+1) ▷ Advance current solution 

29: end for 

30: return y(t)

• Commit ( κgrpo ). κgrpo : V′ 

> evo

→ V evo applies accepted updates back to RSPL resources, completing the state transition. 

The Evolutionary Loop. Algorithm 5 summarizes the GRPO loop in a phased form. Each iteration (i) samples K candidate solutions, (ii) computes GRPO signals via group normalized advantages and clipped objectives, (iii) improves trainable resources through multi candidate conditioned reflection and edits, (iv) optionally improves the solution text, and (v) applies an early stopping evaluation. 24