Title: Reinforcement Learning for Compositional Generalization with Outcome-Level Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04920v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 01:00:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Reinforcement Learning for Compositional Generalization with Outcome-Level Optimization 

Xiyan Fu 1 and Wei Liu 21 Nanyang Technological University 2 Independent Researcher 

xiyan.fu@ntu.edu.sg | wei.liu.llm@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Compositional generalization refers to cor-rectly interpret novel combinations of known primitives, which remains a major challenge. Existing approaches often rely on supervised fine-tuning, which encourages models to im-itate target outputs. This token-level training paradigm fails to capture the global compo-sitional structure required for generalizing to unseen combinations. In this work, we investi-gate whether compositional generalization can instead be improved through outcome-level re-inforcement learning. We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization to optimize models based on feedback on their final outputs. Within this framework, we explore both a simple binary outcome reward and a composite reward that provides additional composition feedback. Ex-periments on multiple compositional bench-marks show that reinforcement learning im-proves compositional generalization compared to supervised fine-tuning. Further analysis re-veals that supervised models tend to overfit fre-quent training compositions, whereas reinforce-ment learning improves compositional general-ization by reshaping the output distribution, par-ticularly for more complex composition types. 

1 Introduction 

Compositional generalization (Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988; Lake et al., 2017; Hupkes et al., 2020), a hall-mark of human cognition, refers to the ability to understand and produce novel combinations by sys-tematically recombining known components. As il-lustrated in Figure 1, humans who understand ‘turn left and run → LTURN RUN’ and ‘walk and jump twice → WALK JUMP JUMP’ can infer a new combination ‘jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN’ by recombining the known compo-nents. This ability enables extrapolation beyond the empirical data distribution and is therefore widely regarded as essential for models to generalize to unseen and increasingly complex reasoning tasks. example                       

> [train] turn left and run → LTURN RUN
> [train] walk and jump twice → WALK JUMP JUMP
> [test] jump twice and turn left →JUMP JUMP LTURN
> ො𝑔 :WALK JUMP WALK
> outcome -level token -level
> Cross -Entropy Loss
> supervised signal
> 𝑔 𝑡 :WALK JUMP JUMP
> walk and jump twice
> ො𝑔 1:WALK JUMP JUMP
> ො𝑔 2:WALK JUMP WALK
> walk and jump twice
> reward signal
> 𝑟 1:+1,good response
> 𝑟 2:−1,bad response

Figure 1: Illustration of compositional generalization and training paradigms. Top : Example of compositional general-ization where the model must correctly compose previously seen primitives (e.g., jump twice and turn left) to produce the correct action sequence for a novel instruction. Bottom : Com-parison of training signals. Token-level optimization relies on supervised targets and cross-entropy loss, whereas outcome-level optimization samples multiple responses and optimizes them using reward signals. 

Given the importance of compositional gener-alization, extensive research has explored how to equip neural models with this capability. Early works (Lake and Baroni, 2018; Kim and Linzen, 2020) mainly relied on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) with teacher forcing (Lamb et al., 2016), where models are trained to imitate target outputs. However, such methods often struggle to generalize to novel compositions despite strong in-distribution performance. Subsequent studies have attempted to address this limitation through data augmentation (Andreas, 2020; Li et al., 2023; Yao and Koller, 2024), which exposes models to diverse composi-tional patterns, or architecture designs (Guo et al., 2020) that introduce compositional inductive bi-ases. While these approaches improve performance on compositional benchmarks, they still rely on token-level supervision that optimizes local token predictions. However, compositional correctness 

> arXiv:2605.04920v1 [cs.LG] 6 May 2026

is inherently a global property of the output se-quence, i.e., an output may appear locally plausi-ble while still violating the intended composition rule. This mismatch raises a natural question: can compositional generalization be learned through outcome-level optimization instead? To explore this question, we adopt a reinforce-ment learning (RL) framework, in which models are optimized based on feedback on their final out-puts rather than token-level supervision. Specifi-cally, we employ Group Relative Policy Optimiza-tion (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) as the training framework. Figure 1 compares the training signals used in SFT and GRPO. Within this framework, we design two types of reward signals: (i) a coarse-grained binary reward that provides feedback based on the exact match between the generated output and the ground truth, and (ii) a fine-grained com-posite reward that decomposes the task and pro-vides additional feedback for primitive prediction and compositional structure. Across multiple com-positional benchmarks, we find that RL training im-proves compositional generalization performance. Interestingly, we observe that two rewards achieve comparable results, suggesting that compositional generalization may emerge from minimal outcome-level feedback. To better understand differences between token-level supervision and outcome-level optimization in composition, we analyze the behaviors of models trained with SFT and RL. We investigate perfor-mance across compositional types, finding larger improvements from RL on productivity tests (i.e., length splits), particularly for compositions closer to the training length. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that SFT-trained models tend to overfit com-positional patterns observed during training, often reproducing familiar structures when they make incorrect predictions for novel compositions. In contrast, RL-trained models reshape the output probability distribution, reducing the bias toward frequent training compositions and improving the ranking of candidates. This behavior becomes evi-dent under multi-sample evaluation (e.g., pass@k), where RL mainly improves top-1 accuracy while achieving comparable performance at larger k.Our main contributions are as following: • We propose reinforcement learning paradigm for compositional generalization, where mod-els are optimized using feedback on the final output rather than token-level supervision. • We design two types of reward signals, bi-nary and composite, to guide RL training and improve compositional generalization across multiple benchmarks. • Through behavioral analyses, we demonstrate that SFT tends to overfit training patterns. In contrast, RL reshapes the output distribution and leads to improvements in compositional generalization ability, especially on complex composition types. 

2 Related Work 

Compositional Generalization Compositional generalization refers to the ability of a model to sys-tematically recombine known primitives or rules to understand or generate novel compositions (Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988; Lake et al., 2017; Hupkes et al., 2020). It has been extensively studied across diverse settings, such as in semantic parsing (Lake and Baroni, 2018; Kim and Linzen, 2020; Qiu et al., 2022b), machine translation (Li et al., 2021; Dankers et al., 2022), deductive reasoning (Saparov et al., 2023), natural language inference (Yanaka et al., 2020; Fu and Frank, 2023), etc. They found that even state-of-the-art LLMs are still not able to perform compositional generalization. To address this limitation, a number of ap-proaches have been proposed. Qiu et al. (2022a); Levy et al. (2023); Yao and Koller (2024) introduce data augmentation strategies that inject composi-tional inductive bias into neural sequence models by generating additional training examples or re-combining components across existing examples. Other works (Zheng and Lapata, 2021; Herzig and Berant, 2021) design specialized model architec-tures to better capture compositional structures, such as modular architectures or parallel decoding mechanisms. More recent studies explore alterna-tive training paradigms, including meta-learning (Conklin et al., 2021; Lake and Baroni, 2023) and continual learning (Fu and Frank, 2024), to im-prove models’ adaptability to more realistic scenar-ios. However, these approaches still rely on token-level supervision, optimizing models to predict in-dividual tokens rather than ensuring the correctness of the entire compositional output sequence. In con-trast, we investigate whether compositional gener-alization can be improved through reinforcement learning, which provides outcome-level feedback and enables global optimization over complete se-quences. Reinforcement Learning for Generalization 

Reinforcement learning is widely used in the post-training of LLMs to better align model outputs with human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Beyond alignment, recent studies suggest that RL can also improve generalization compared to imitative learning (Bi et al., 2024; Lambert et al., 2025). In particular, RL tuning enhances cross-lingual generalization, especially when trained on non-English data (Huang et al., 2026), as well as cross-category generalization, where training on one domain (e.g., geometry) transfers to others (e.g., algebra) (Wang et al., 2025). It also improves cross-domain generalization, e.g., Wei et al. (2025) introduce Llama3-SWE-RL, which achieves strong performance on software engineering tasks despite being trained solely on software evolution data. Similar trends are observed in multimodal settings, where Chu et al. (2026) report improved general-ization across both unimodal and multimodal rea-soning benchmarks. More recently, several stud-ies have explored modifications to the RL training paradigm to further enhance generalization. For example, Tang et al. (2025); Zhang et al. (2026) combine on-policy and off-policy learning to im-prove the generalizability of reasoning language models. In contrast to these works, we focus on composi-tional generalization, investigating how RL affects the ability of models to handle novel combinations of known primitives. In addition, we conduct a detailed comparison between RL and supervised fine-tuning (SFT), showing that RL reshapes dis-tributions and avoids copying frequent patterns of training compositions. 

3 Methods 

3.1 Problem Definition 

Compositional generalization tests are designed to evaluate whether a model can generalize to unseen compositions whose constituting primitives and composing rules have been observed in training. For example, we can evaluate a model’s compo-sitional generalization ability by testing it on an unseen compositional sample jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN after training with 

jump twice after run → RUN JUMP JUMP and 

run and turn left → RUN LTURN . Here, jump →

JUMP and turn left → LTURN are primitives, vx

and vy → X Y is the implicit composition rule. We denote the set of primitives as P and the set of composition rules as R. A compositional in-stance is generated by applying a composition rule 

r ∈ R to a tuple of primitives (p1, . . . , p k), where 

pi ∈ P . Each compositional type can therefore be represented as a pair (p, r ), where p denotes the primitives involved. Correspondingly, C denotes the set of all possible compositional types: 

C = {(p, r ) | p ⊆ P , r ∈ R} . (1) For compositional generalization tests, the sets of compositional types used for training and test-ing are always ensured disjoint, Ctrain ∩ C test = ∅.At the same time, all primitives and composition rules appearing in test instances are guaranteed to have been observed during training: Ptest ⊆ P train ,

Rtest ⊆ R train . This setup ensures that test in-stances require genuine recombination of known primitives under familiar composition rules, rather than extrapolation to entirely unseen components. 

3.2 Compositional Group Relative Policy Optimization 

To investigate whether compositional generaliza-tion can be learned through outcome-level opti-mization, we adopt a reinforcement learning (RL) training framework. This paradigm allows LLMs to autonomously explore and discover latent com-positional structures through reward-based feed-back. Specifically, we employ Group Relative Pol-icy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024), a computationally efficient RL algorithm that has demonstrated strong empirical performance. The overall training procedure is illustrated in Figure 2. 

3.2.1 Policy and Rollout Generation 

We parameterize the language model as a stochas-tic policy πθ(y | x), which generates an output sequence y conditioned on an input x. For each training input, we sample a group of K candidate outputs, forming a rollout group G associated with the same input. 

G = {y1, . . . , y K } ∼ πθ(· | x), (2) Each output yi in the group is a complete composi-tional prediction generated by the model. 

3.2.2 Reward Assignment 

For each sampled output yi, we assign a scalar re-ward ri based on the correctness of the generated prediction. We consider two types of reward func-tions: a binary reward that provides coarse-grained supervision, and a composite reward that offers more fine-grained feedback. binary reward                          

> jump twice and turn left
> y1:JUMP JUMP LTURN
> y2:LTURN JUMP JUMP
> y𝑘 :RUN WALK LTURN
> y1
> 𝑦 𝑡 :JUMP JUMP LTURN
> …
> y2y3…
> rollout sample
> ground truth
> composition reward
> policy model
> y1y2y𝑘 …10.2 0.6
> primitive: JUMP / LTURN
> composition: 𝑉 (𝑥 1)𝑉 (𝑥 1)𝑉 (𝑥 2)
> advantage
> 𝐴 1
> 𝐴 2
> 𝐴 𝑘
> …
> 𝑟 −𝜇
> 𝜎 Figure 2: Overview of Compositional Group Relative Policy Optimization. The LLM samples a group of candidate label sequences (y1, y 2, . . . , y K)based on inputs. Each candidate is then evaluated using two complementary reward signals: (i) abinary reward that measures exact match with the gold sequence, and (ii) a compositional reward that assesses primitive correctness and structural composition patterns. Rewards are normalized within the sampled group to compute relative advantages, which are then used to update the policy via group-relative optimization.

Binary Reward. The binary reward assigns a score of either 0 or 1 based on exact matching between the generated compositional prediction and the ground-truth output. While simple and deterministic, this binary reward treats all incor-rect trajectories uniformly, failing to capture partial correctness or relative quality among different er-roneous predictions. 

Composite Reward. To provide more fine-grained feedback for incorrect predictions, we in-troduce a composite reward that evaluates both 

primitive correctness and compositional structure .Given a predicted action sequence ypred and a ground-truth sequence ygold , we define the two reward components as follows: • Primitive. We extract the sets of primitives appearing in the predicted and gold sequences, denoted as P pred and P gold , respectively. The primitive reward measures the coverage of gold primitives by the prediction, denoted as: 

Rprim (ypred , y gold ) = P pred ∩ P gold 

|P gold | . (3) This reward encourages the model to cor-rectly identify and generate the required primi-tives, while ignoring invariant to their ordering and repetition. For example, in the composi-tional instruction example, jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN , the primi-tives JUMP and LTURN are extracted. • Composition. We abstract away concrete primitive identities and focus solely on their compositional patterns. Each primitive is mapped to a variable, yielding a normalized and ordered sequence that represents the com-positional skeleton. We then compute the com-positional reward by measuring position-wise matches between the predicted and gold skele-tons. Let Cpred and Cgold denote the skele-tons derived from the predicted and gold se-quences, respectively. The compositional re-ward is defined as: 

Rcomp (ypred , y gold ) = 1

|Cgold ||Cgold |X

> i=1

1

h

Cpred  

> i

= Cgold 

> i

i

(4) This reward encourages the model to fo-cus on compositional structures, while ignor-ing primitives. For instance, the instruction 

jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN yields the compositional skeleton 

V (x1) V (x1) V (x2), obtained by mapping each distinct primitive to a unique placeholder variable. The final composite reward 1 is obtained as the weighted sum of the primitive and composition components. We denoted it as R = λ1Rprim +

λ2Rcomp , where λ1 and λ2 are hyper-parameters. 

3.3 Group Relative Policy Optimization 

To optimize the policy, we employ Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), where the advantage 

> 1The specific definitions of primitives and compositions for each dataset are provided in Table 4 (Appendix A.2).

is computed by comparing the relative performance of trajectories within the same sampled group G.Specifically, we compute a normalized advantage for each sampled output by subtracting the group mean reward: 

ˆAi = ri − μr

σr

. (5) where μr and σr denote the mean and standard de-viation of rewards within the rollout group. This group-relative advantage emphasizes which gener-ations perform better or worse compared to other candidates under the same input, mitigating reward scale sensitivity and stabilizing training. Given the computed advantages, the policy is updated by maximizing the expected advantage-weighted log-likelihood of generated outputs while constraining excessive deviation from a reference policy. The GRPO objective is defined as: 

JGRPO (θ) = E

"

1

K

> K

X

> i=1

1

|yi|

X

> t

Lclip 

 ri,t (θ), ˆAi,t 

#

− βD KL (πθ∥πref )

(6) The clipping operator limits excessively large pol-icy updates with threshold ϵ, denoted as: 

Lclip (r, ˆA) = min( r ˆA, clip (r, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆA) (7) Here, K denotes the number of sampled outputs in each group, and |yi| represents the length of i-th generated output yi. The term ri,t (θ) denotes the probability ratio between the current policy πθ and the behavior policy used to generate the samples, while ˆAi,t represents the token-level advantage de-fined in Eq. 5. The KL divergence with strength β

regularizes the policy, preventing excessive devia-tion from the supervised distribution. 

4 Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate on four standard compositional gener-alization benchmarks: SCAN, COGS, GeoQuery, and CFQ. They capture complementary aspects of compositionality and form a diverse testbed for evaluation. Data statistics and examples of primi-tive and compositional structures for reward design are provided in Appendix A.1 and A.2. 

SCAN (Lake and Baroni, 2018) is a synthetic dataset designed to test compositional generaliza-tion in grounded language understanding. Each example pairs a simple navigation command with a sequence of atomic actions representing its ex-ecution, e.g., jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN . For composite reward, we define primitives at the action level (e.g., JUMP, LTURN), while compositional structures are abstracted as higher-level templates over primitives (e.g., V (x1)

V (x1) V (x2)). SCAN provides several splits tar-geting different compositional generalization set-tings. We select the turnleft and length splits, as they are more challenging (Qiu et al., 2022a). 

COGS (Kim and Linzen, 2020) is a benchmark designed to evaluate compositional generalization in semantic interpretation. The task is to map natu-ral language sentences to structured semantic rep-resentations, e.g., A hedgehog ate the cake → × 

cake( x4) ; hedgehog( x1) AND eat.agent( x2, x1)AND eat.theme( x2, x4). For composite reward, we define predicates and entities as primitives (e.g., hedgehog, cake, eat.agent, eat.theme) and abstract their underlying argument structures into compo-sitional templates (e.g., N (x4) ∧ N (x1) ∧

V.agent (x2, x 1) ∧ V.theme (x2, x 4)). 

GeoQuery (Herzig and Berant, 2021) is a seman-tic parsing benchmark that maps natural language questions to logical forms representing queries over a geographic database. Each example con-sists of a question paired with a corresponding structured query, e.g., What states border Texas? 

→ answer state next_to stateid texas . For com-positional reward design, we decompose logical forms into atomic primitives, including entities and relations (e.g., stateid(texas), next_to), and ab-stract their compositional templates (e.g., N (x1) ∧

R(x1, x 2)). We use the linearized FunQL represen-tation provided in the dataset, where logical forms are expressed as sequences of function tokens. 

CFQ (Keysers et al., 2020) is a semantic pars-ing benchmark for evaluating compositional gen-eralization in mapping natural language questions to SPARQL queries. Each instance consists of a question paired with its corresponding logical form, e.g., Who directed Elysium? → SELECT DIS-TINCT ?x0 WHERE {?x0 a ns:people.person. ?x0 ns:film.director.film m.0gwm_wy .} . For composite reward, we further decompose SPARQL queries into atomic primitives as entities and relations (e.g., ns:people.person, ns:film.director.film), and abstract the composition structures (e.g., N (x1) ∧

R(x1, x 2)). We adopt the three Maximum Com-SCAN COGS GeoQuery CFQ length turn left template length MCD1 MCD2 MCD3 Avg 

Llama 

SFT 11.88 69.03 81.12 50.36 43.21 91.04 74.85 77.42 81.10 GRPO-Binary 18.49 71.52 83.90 52.48 45.92 91.35 76.44 81.46 83.08 GRPO-Compos 23.44 70.74 82.88 52.07 46.17 92.10 76.16 83.44 83.90 

Qwen 

SFT 18.41 78.06 82.09 73.65 28.21 88.52 73.98 73.67 78.72 GRPO-Binary 22.68 79.13 83.23 75.27 32.14 89.23 75.73 76.54 80.50 GRPO-Compos 21.81 78.76 83.15 77.90 33.76 89.16 77.33 75.86 80.78  

> Table 1: Results of SFT and GRPO on four compositional generalization benchmarks across various settings. We report exact matching accuracy for all evaluations. All results are averaged over three runs and reported as mean accuracy.

pound Divergence (MCD) splits provided in the original dataset, which are specifically designed to induce strong compositional distribution shifts. 

4.2 Implementation Details 

We conduct our experiments on Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct (Qwen, 2024) and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024), given their superior perfor-mance. During training, we observe that reinforce-ment learning from scratch suffers from unstable optimization due to the large and sparse exploration space. Therefore, we adopt a supervised warm-up stage via SFT to initialize the policy following previous works (Shao et al., 2024), which signifi-cantly stabilizes subsequent GRPO training. 2 After the warm-up stage, we further optimize the policy using Compositional Group Relative Policy Opti-mization. For each input, we sample 8 trajectories with a temperature of 0.6. The update batch size is 8, and the learning rate is set to 1e-6. The hyper-parameters λ1 and λ2 for the composite reward are set to 0.1 and 0.2, respectively. 

5 Results 

5.1 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the compositional generalization re-sults across four benchmarks using two base mod-els. Compared with the SFT baseline, both GRPO variants, GRPO-Binary and GRPO-Composite, consistently achieve better performance across all benchmarks and model bases. The results sug-gest that outcome-level optimization (i.e., RL-based strategies) is more effective than token-level imita- 

> 2For GRPO training, we use the code https://github. com/verl-project/verl .

tion (i.e., SFT-based strategies) for learning com-positional behaviors .We further analyze the results across different types of compositional generalization. 3 We ob-serve that the improvements brought by GRPO are generally larger on productivity settings that require generating longer compositions of known primitives. For example, on the SCAN length split, GRPO-Binary improves performance by 6.61% and 4.27% for the two base models, respectively. In contrast, the gains are smaller on systematicity evaluations, where generalization requires recom-bining known primitives into novel structures. For instance, on the MCD3 split of CFQ, which ex-hibits the largest generalization gap, the improve-ments are 4.04% and 2.87%. Similar trends are observed across GRPO-Composite strategies. No-tably, the absolute performance on productivity tasks (e.g., length splits) is substantially lower than that on systematicity evaluations, indicating that productivity compositional generalization is con-siderably more challenging. These results suggest that outcome-level optimization exhibits different benefits across compositional generalization types and is particularly effective for more challenging settings such as productivity tasks. In addition, we compare different GRPO re-ward strategies and observe that GRPO-Binary and GRPO-Compos achieve comparable performance across various settings. This suggests that composi-tional generalization tests are relatively insensitive to the specific reward formulation. That is, a simple binary outcome signal is already sufficient to guide effective policy optimization.                                       

> 3Different compositional generalization types are dis-cussed in Hupkes et al. (2020) CFQ-MCD3 SCAN-Length prim com em prim com em
> RP+C98.66 90.46 83.44 97.96 92.41 23.44
> RP98.58 88.43 81.60 97.81 89.72 20.97
> RC98.32 90.19 82.73 97.19 92.15 22.13
> Table 2: Ablation study of GRPO-Compos training paradigm based on Llama-3.1-Instruct. We decompose the composite reward design RP+Cby only offering primitive reward RP
> and composite reward RC.prim and com represent primitive and composition accuracy, respectively. em denotes the exact matching accuracy.

5.2 Ablation Study 

In this section, we conduct an ablation study to in-vestigate the effect of compositional reward design in the GRPO-Compos training paradigm on two challenging compositional generalization settings, i.e., MCD3 of CFQ and length of SCAN. Specifi-cally, we decompose the composite reward into its individual components and train GRPO with only one reward at a time: i) the primitive reward, which provides positive feedback for correctly predicting primitives, and ii) the composition reward, which rewards correct compositional structures. The full GRPO-Compos model combines both signals. Ta-ble 2 reports the ablation results. We observe that the full composite reward con-sistently achieves higher exact-match accuracy than using either reward alone. This indicates that the two reward signals provide complementary infor-mation for learning compositional generalization. To better understand the effect of different reward signals, we further decompose the evaluation met-rics into primitive accuracy and composition ac-curacy. Their definitions are provided in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4. As shown in Table 2, primitive reward primarily improves primitive accuracy, while com-position reward contributes more directly to com-position accuracy. Interestingly, primitive accuracy remains comparable between primitive reward only (RP ) and composite reward only ( RC ), suggest-ing that composition reward can also indirectly en-hance primitive prediction. Overall, these results highlight a non-trivial interaction between reward design and the learning dynamics in RL. 

6 Analysis 

In this section, we further compare results from the SFT and GRPO training paradigms to better understand how they influence compositional gen-eralization. 0       

> 5
> CFQ-MCD1 CFQ-MCD2 CFQ-MCD3 Geo-template Geo-length
> SFT GRPO-Binary GRPO-Compos
> 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞 𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡  (‰)
> Figure 3: Average training trigram frequency of incorrect predictions from SFT and GRPO. Trigram frequencies are computed with respect to the training data, excluding trigrams appearing in ground-truth outputs.

6.1 Copying Behavior 

Prior works (Rice et al., 2020) suggest that poor generalization may stem from models overfitting to the prior output distribution of the training data. In compositional generalization tasks, this man-ifests as models relying on frequently occurring output fragments rather than composing primitives according to the input. In this section, we examine whether token-level optimization (i.e., SFT) en-courages models to follow such frequent structural patterns, and whether outcome-level optimization (i.e., GRPO) can alleviate this issue. To quantify this tendency, we examine whether model predictions prefer output trigrams that are more frequent in the training data. We first com-pute trigram statistics from the output sequences in the training set and normalize their frequencies, denoted as f req train . For incorrect samples, we extract all trigrams from the model predictions and look up their frequencies according to f req train .We then define the average trigram frequency of a sequence as a measure of how strongly it aligns with common structural patterns in the training data. To avoid bias from valid output patterns, we exclude trigrams that also appear in the ground-truth outputs when computing the average trigram frequency. Finally, we compare this metric for incorrect samples produced by SFT and GRPO. We conduct this analysis on CFQ and GeoQuery, where trigrams capture meaningful structural pat-terns. The results are shown in Figure 3. We observe that the SFT paradigm consistently produces predictions with higher average trigram frequency than GRPO. This suggests that SFT tends to rely more on frequent structural patterns from the training data, whereas GRPO exhibits weaker alignment with such patterns. Furthermore, CFQ-MCD3 SCAN-Length @1 @5 @10 @1 @5 @10 SFT 77.90 82.21 83.28 11.02 20.69 23.77 GRPO-B 81.57 82.66 83.42 18.57 21.10 23.81 GRPO-C 83.42 83.53 83.61 23.85 24.21 24.39  

> Table 3: Comparison of top-k accuracy (pass@k) for SFT and GRPO-based methods, i.e., GRPO-B(inary) and GRPO-C(omposite).

we find that GRPO-Compos yields lower trigram frequencies than GRPO-Binary, particularly on the CFQ benchmark, even though it does not lead to higher accuracy (see Table 1). This result suggests that rewarding primitives and compositional struc-tures helps mitigate the tendency to copy frequent patterns from the training data. 

6.2 Top-k Performance 

The trigram analysis suggests that SFT tends to rely more heavily on frequent patterns from the training data. Such reliance may affect the rank-ing of candidate outputs during decoding, causing inferior compositional generalization ability. To further examine this effect, we evaluate models using top-k accuracy. Specifically, for each test example, we set the sampling temperature to 0.6 and generate k candidate outputs. We then mea-sure whether at least one sampled output matches the gold output, denoted as pass@k . Formally, pass@k = 1

> N

PNi=1 1

h

∃j ≤ k, ˆy(j) 

> i

= yi

i

, where 

yi denotes the gold output and ˆy(j) 

> i

is the j-th sam-pled prediction. Table 3 presents results. We find that GRPO variants achieve higher top-1 accuracy (pass@1) than SFT on both benchmarks, while their top-10 performance (pass@10) remains comparable. This suggests that GRPO mainly im-proves the ranking of candidate outputs by assign-ing higher probability to correct structures, result-ing in a sharper output distribution. In contrast, SFT tends to rank frequent training patterns higher, which may lead to incorrect predictions being pri-oritized during decoding. Consistently, the larger gap between pass@1 and pass@k of SFT indi-cates greater sensitivity to the choice of k, whereas GRPO remains comparatively stable across differ-ent decoding budgets. 

6.3 Length Extrapolation 

To further understand how different training paradigms behave under varying compositional complexity, we analyze model performance with accuracy ( ％)      

> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 24-26 27-30 31-35 36+
> SFT GRPO-Binary GRPO-Compos
> Figure 4: Performance on the SCAN-Length split across various target output lengths. Examples are grouped into bins by output length.

respect to output length. In compositional gen-eralization tasks, longer outputs typically corre-spond to more complex structural compositions and therefore present a more challenging composi-tionality. We group the test examples into several buckets according to the gold output length (24–26, 27–30, 31–35, and 36+) and report the correspond-ing pass@k performance for each bucket. Figure 4 shows the accuracy of SFT and GRPO on SCAN-length as output length increases. All methods exhibit a general decline beyond lengths of 24–26, indicating that compositional general-ization degrades with longer outputs and remains challenging even under outcome-level optimiza-tion. GRPO consistently outperforms SFT, par-ticularly on shorter outputs (24–26 tokens), sug-gesting that SFT struggles to produce structurally correct outputs even at shorter lengths. In contrast, GRPO mitigates this issue through reward-based optimization, encouraging structurally valid predic-tions. Moreover, GRPO-Compos achieves slightly better performance, indicating that explicitly re-warding primitives and compositional structures further enhances the model’s ability to capture com-positional patterns. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we study whether compositional gen-eralization can be improved through outcome-level optimization rather than token-level supervised training. Experiments across multiple benchmarks show that GRPO consistently improves composi-tional generalization. Additionally, we find that a simple binary reward performs comparably to composite rewards. Further analysis suggests that RL reshapes the distribution and mitigates overfit-ting to training compositions, thereby improving compositional generalization. 8 Limitation 

Reinforcement learning introduces additional com-putational cost compared to standard supervised fine-tuning, which may limit its practicality in large-scale training scenarios. In addition, our study only explores relatively simple reward for-mulations, including binary and composite rewards. More sophisticated reward designs or alternative outcome-level feedback signals may further affect the effectiveness of reinforcement learning for com-positional generalization, which we leave for future work. 

References 

Jacob Andreas. 2020. Good-enough compositional data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 7556–7566, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding, Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with longter-mism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954 .Xiangxiang Chu, Hailang Huang, Xiao Zhang, Fei Wei, and Yong Wang. 2026. GPG: A simple and strong reinforcement learning baseline for model reason-ing. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Henry Conklin, Bailin Wang, Kenny Smith, and Ivan Titov. 2021. Meta-learning to compositionally gen-eralize. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 3322–3335, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Verna Dankers, Elia Bruni, and Dieuwke Hupkes. 2022. The paradox of the compositionality of natural lan-guage: A neural machine translation case study. In 

Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4154–4175, Dublin, Ireland. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jerry A Fodor and Zenon W Pylyshyn. 1988. Connec-tionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. 

Cognition , 28(1-2):3–71. Xiyan Fu and Anette Frank. 2023. SETI: Systematicity evaluation of textual inference. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 4101–4114, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiyan Fu and Anette Frank. 2024. Exploring contin-ual learning of compositional generalization in NLI. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:912–932. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Yinuo Guo, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Dongmei Zhang. 2020. Hierarchical poset decoding for com-positional generalization in language. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,pages 6913–6924. Accepted at NeurIPS 2020. Jonathan Herzig and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Span-based semantic parsing for compositional general-ization. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 908–921, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Shulin Huang, Yiran Ding, Junshu Pan, and Yue Zhang. 2026. Beyond english-centric training: How rein-forcement learning improves cross-lingual reasoning in LLMs. In The Fourteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. 2020. Compositionality decomposed: How do neural networks generalise? Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 67:757–795. Daniel Keysers, Nathanael Schärli, Nathan Scales, Hylke Buisman, Daniel Furrer, Sergii Kashubin, Nikola Momchev, Danila Sinopalnikov, Lukasz Stafiniak, Tibor Tihon, Dmitry Tsarkov, Xiao Wang, Marc van Zee, and Olivier Bousquet. 2020. Measur-ing compositional generalization: A comprehensive method on realistic data. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Najoung Kim and Tal Linzen. 2020. COGS: A compo-sitional generalization challenge based on semantic interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9087–9105, Online. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. 2018. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In In-ternational conference on machine learning , pages 2873–2882. PMLR. Brenden M Lake and Marco Baroni. 2023. Human-like systematic generalization through a meta-learning neural network. Nature , pages 1–7. Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenen-baum, and Samuel J Gershman. 2017. Building ma-chines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and brain sciences , 40. Alex M Lamb, Anirudh Goyal ALIAS PARTH GOYAL, Ying Zhang, Saizheng Zhang, Aaron C Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Professor forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29. Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, Yuling Gu, Saumya Malik, Victoria Graf, Jena D. Hwang, Jiangjiang Yang, Ronan Le Bras, Oyvind Tafjord, Christopher Wilhelm, Luca Soldaini, and 4 others. 2025. Tulu 3: Pushing fron-tiers in open language model post-training. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Itay Levy, Ben Bogin, and Jonathan Berant. 2023. Di-verse demonstrations improve in-context composi-tional generalization. In Proceedings of the 61st An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1401– 1422, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Yafu Li, Yongjing Yin, Yulong Chen, and Yue Zhang. 2021. On compositional generalization of neural ma-chine translation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4767–4780, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhaoyi Li, Ying Wei, and Defu Lian. 2023. Learning to substitute spans towards improving compositional generalization. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2791–2811, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc. Linlu Qiu, Peter Shaw, Panupong Pasupat, Pawel Nowak, Tal Linzen, Fei Sha, and Kristina Toutanova. 2022a. Improving compositional generalization with latent structure and data augmentation. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 Conference of the North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 4341–4362, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Linlu Qiu, Peter Shaw, Panupong Pasupat, Tianze Shi, Jonathan Herzig, Emily Pitler, Fei Sha, and Kristina Toutanova. 2022b. Evaluating the impact of model scale for compositional generalization in semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9157–9179, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Team Qwen. 2024. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models. Leslie Rice, Eric Wong, and Zico Kolter. 2020. Overfit-ting in adversarially robust deep learning. In Proceed-ings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 8093–8104. PMLR. Abulhair Saparov, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Vishakh Pad-makumar, Nitish Joshi, Mehran Kazemi, Najoung Kim, and He He. 2023. Testing the general deductive reasoning capacity of large language models using OOD examples. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y.K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. Yunhao Tang, Taco Cohen, David W Zhang, Michal Valko, and Rémi Munos. 2025. Rl-finetuning llms from on-and off-policy data with a single algorithm. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19612 .Yiping Wang, Qing Yang, Zhiyuan Zeng, Liliang Ren, Liyuan Liu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Xuehai He, Kuan Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, Shuohang Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and yelong shen. 2025. Reinforcement learning for reasoning in large lan-guage models with one training example. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Yuxiang Wei, Olivier Duchenne, Jade Copet, Quentin Carbonneaux, LINGMING ZHANG, Daniel Fried, Gabriel Synnaeve, Rishabh Singh, and Sida Wang. 2025. SWE-RL: Advancing LLM reasoning via re-inforcement learning on open software evolution. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems .Hitomi Yanaka, Koji Mineshima, Daisuke Bekki, and Kentaro Inui. 2020. Do neural models learn sys-tematicity of monotonicity inference in natural lan-guage? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 6105–6117, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuekun Yao and Alexander Koller. 2024. Simple and effective data augmentation for compositional gener-alization. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 434–449, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wenhao Zhang, Yuexiang Xie, Yuchang Sun, Yanxi Chen, Guoyin Wang, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2026. On-policy RL meets off-policy experts: Harmonizing supervised fine-tuning and re-inforcement learning via dynamic weighting. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Hao Zheng and Mirella Lapata. 2021. Compositional generalization via semantic tagging. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 1022–1032, Punta Cana, Do-minican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dataset Setting Example SCAN original jump twice and turn left → JUMP JUMP LTURN primitive JUMP LTURN composition V (x1) V (x1) V (x2)

COGS original A hedgehog ate the cake →

cake( x4) ; hedgehog( x1) AND eat.agent( x2, x1) AND eat.theme( x2, x4)primitive [entity prim ] hedgehog, cake [ relation prim ] eat.agent, eat.theme composition N (x4) ∧ N (x1) ∧ V.agent (x2, x 1) ∧ V.theme (x2, x 4)

GeoQuery original What states border Texas? → answer state next_to stateid texas primitive [entity prim ] texas [ relation prim ] next_to composition N (x1) ∧ R(x2, x 1)

CFQ original Who directed Elysium? →

SELECT DISTINCT ?x0 WHERE { ?x0 a ns:people.person. ?x0 ns:film.director.film m.0gwm_wy .} primitive [entity prim ] ns:people.person, m.0gwm_wy [ relation prim ] ns:film.director.film composition N (x1) ∧ R(x1, x 2)     

> Table 4: Examples from SCAN, COGS, GeoQuery, and CFQ illustrating primitive–composition decomposition. For each dataset, we show the original input–output pair and its decomposition into primitives and abstract composition structures. This formulation separates lexical primitives from structural composition, enabling compositional-level reward. We abstract primitives into entities/actions and relations, and represent compositional structures using unified predicate templates N(x),R(x, y ), and
> V(x).

A Data 

A.1 Data Statistic 

We use four compositional benchmarks in this pa-per, including SCAN, COGS, GeoQuery, and CFQ. The data statistic is collected in Table 5. Dataset Setting # train # dev. # test SCAN turnleft 21890 - 1208 length 16990 - 3920 COGS - 24155 3000 3000 GeoQuery template 544 60 276 length 540 60 280 CFQ MCD1 95743 11968 11968 MCD2 95743 11968 11968 MCD3 95743 11968 11968  

> Table 5: Statistics of datasets and splits used in our experi-ments.

A.2 Data Example for Composition Reward 

Table 4 lists examples from four compositional gen-eralization benchmarks, together with the primitive and compositional abstractions used to compute the compositional reward.