Title: PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05399v2

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:42:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 

YOUNGJOO AHN, Yonsei University, South Korea 

SANGYEOP YEO, Yonsei University, South Korea 

GIJUNG IM, Yonsei University, South Korea 

JONGMIN LEE, Yonsei University, South Korea 

JINYOUNG YEO, Yonsei University, South Korea 

JIEUNG KIM, Yonsei University, South Korea Automated proof generation for formal software verification remains a largely unresolved challenge despite recent advances in large language models (LLMs ). Generative AI has achieved remarkable success across domains such as natural language processing, computer vision, and software engineering tasks including code generation and summarization. However, several labor-intensive tasks that require substantial human expertise have not yet benefited significantly from these models. Among them, formal verification is one of the well-known domains in which LLMs are still struggling with. Formal verification has a huge benefit that it can provide machine-checked guarantees of functional correctness for safety-critical systems. Despite this benefit, however, its adoption remains limited due to scalability issues. In practice, the process relies on interactive theorem proving (ITP ), where engineers must manually construct detailed proofs under strict logical constraints, requiring significant expertise and time. For example, verifying the seL4 microkernel, which is the first fully verified operating system kernel, required decades of cumulative person-years of effort. Consequently, recent advances in LLMs have renewed interest in reducing this human burden through automated proof synthesis. Nevertheless, existing LLM-assisted approaches remain fundamentally limited. Most treat proof generation as either a single-shot generation task or a shallow retrieval-augmented process, relying on repeated sampling to accumulate successful attempts. Such strategies work to some extent when the proof context is relatively small. However, they rapidly struggle to scale to large, highly interdependent verification artifacts, such as operating systems, microkernels, or verified compilers, where proofs exhibit deep structural dependencies across files, modules, and abstraction layers. To address this challenge, we present PROMISE (PRO of MI ning via Structural Embeddings ), a structure-aware proof mining framework that reframes proof generation as a stateful and iterative search process guided by structurally similar proofs . Rather than retrieving premises or proofs based on surface-level textual similarity, PROMISE mines structural similarity over proof states and tactic-transition traces, capturing how goals, assumptions, and contexts evolve during successful derivations. By aligning proof-state transitions, PROMISE retrieves structurally compatible proof fragments and incrementally adapts them to new targets, transforming repeated LLM trials into guided, state-aware proof search. We evaluate PROMISE on the seL4 microkernel verification benchmark using multiple LLM backends, including GPT-3.5-Turbo and Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, and compare it with recent LLM-based proof automation systems such as Selene [41 ]

and Rango [36 ]. PROMISE consistently outperforms prior approaches across the majority of settings, with improvements reaching up to +26 points (186% relative gain ), while remaining competitive with the strongest baseline in the sole exception (GPT-4.1/P2 ). Moreover, PROMISE maintains strong performance across models of varying capability when compared with other methods. These results demonstrate that structure-aware mining of proof-state transition traces is an important step toward making LLM-assisted theorem proving more robust and scalable for real-world system software verification. Additional Key Words and Phrases: Information retrieval, Proof auto generation, Formal verification 

Authors ’ Contact Information: Youngjoo Ahn, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, lordahn@yonsei.ac.kr; Sangyeop Yeo, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, sangyeop@yonsei.ac.kr; Gijung Im, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Ko-rea, kijeonglim@yonsei.ac.kr; Jongmin Lee, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, jongmin.lee@yonsei.ac.kr; Jinyoung Yeo, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, jinyeo@yonsei.ac.kr; Jieung Kim, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, jieungkim@yonsei.ac.kr.  

> arXiv:2604.05399v2 [cs.LO] 9 Apr 2026 2Ahn et al.

1 Introduction 

Formal verification provides the strongest guarantees of software correctness. Unlike testing, which can only reveal the presence of bugs, formal verification enables mathematically proving that a system satisfies its specification. Due to these benefits, formal verification has been actively in-vestigated over the past several decades [30 ], both through improvements in the underlying veri-fication theories and through the application of these theories to increasingly large and complex systems. As a result, several landmark verification projects have demonstrated that full functional correctness of complex system software is achievable. Notable examples include the seL4 micro-kernel [16 ], the FSCQ verified file system [6], and the CertiKOS certified operating system [11 ].These efforts provide clear evidence that large-scale system software can be verified end-to-end with strong mathematical guarantees. However, these successes come at a substantial cost. Large verification projects often require years of research and engineering effort by expert teams, and the resulting proof artifacts frequently exceed the size of the implementation itself. For example, the CertiKOS project contains nearly 200,000 lines of proofs, whereas the verified kernel code consists of fewer than 7,000 lines [11 ].Similar patterns have been observed in other large-scale verification projects. Their proof devel-opments involve tens of thousands of lemmas and complex dependencies across modules and ab-straction layers. These observations highlight a fundamental scalability challenge of formal verifi-cation. While verification can guarantee correctness, proof construction remains extremely labor-intensive. Beyond their size, large verification developments show structural characteristics that make proof construction particularly challenging. Proof artifacts often form deep dependency graphs across files and modules, where the proof of a high-level theorem depends on long chains of auxiliary lem-mas and library results. Moreover, reasoning patterns frequently reappear across different compo-nents of the system, even when the concrete lemmas and contexts differ. These recurring reasoning motifs include sequences of rewriting, simplification, invariant preservation, and rule applications that collectively form characteristic proof evolution patterns. Managing such large and intercon-nected proof structures requires not only logical correctness but also significant engineering effort to organize and reuse reasoning patterns across proofs. Consequently, reducing the cost of proof construction has become a central challenge in formal verification research. Consequently, LLM-based automated proof generation has recently emerged as one of the most promising directions for reducing the cost of proof construction. While earlier proof automation techniques relied primarily on program logics and specialized tactics, LLMs introduce a fundamen-tally different paradigm based on proof synthesis through large-scale learned reasoning. When integrated with trusted proof assistants, LLMs can synthesize tactics [13 ], generate intermediate proof steps [36 ], and sometimes construct entire proofs [9, 39 ]. These approaches have shown promising results in mathematical theorem proving and small-scale program verification tasks, where reasoning contexts remain relatively localized. Building on these successes, recent stud-ies have begun exploring whether LLMs can assist in verifying large system software. Bench-marks such as Selene investigate the feasibility of applying LLM-based proof generation to the seL4 ecosystem [41 ], while experiments on the FSCQ file system demonstrate that LLMs can au-tomatically generate proofs for a nontrivial subset of system-level lemmas [28 ]. However, despite these encouraging results, current LLM-assisted proof generation methods remain far from scal-ing to large verification developments. Empirical evidence shows that their effectiveness degrades sharply on large, highly interdependent proof artifacts. On system-scale benchmarks such as seL4 or FSCQ, reported proof coverage for mid-level lemmas often remains below 30%, even when using PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 3

Fig. 1. Structural retrieval over proof-state transition traces. Unlike keyword-based retrieval that operates on lemmas or proofs, PROMISE retrieves structurally compatible proof fragments based on proof-state evolution patterns. 

state-of-the-art models [28 , 41 ]. These observations suggest that simply improving model capabil-ity may not be sufficient to overcome the scalability limitations of current approaches. 

System Retrieval Reasoning Structural Proof-State Unit Granularity Reasoning Aware LeanDojo Premises Lemma-level 5 3

Rango Proofs + Lemmas Lemma / tactic 5 3

Selene Artifacts Proof-level 5 5

PROMISE (Ours ) Proof-state transitions Transition patterns 3 3

Table 1. Comparison of retrieval strategies in LLM-assisted proof generation. Existing approaches primarily retrieve static artifacts such as premises or proofs, whereas PROMISE retrieves proof-state transition traces to capture structural reasoning patterns. 

A key reason for these limitations lies in how proof automation is formulated in existing ap-proaches. Most current methods treat proof generation either as a search problem over tactic se-quences or as a text-generation task augmented with retrieval of relevant artifacts such as premises, lemmas, or prior proofs. Under this formulation, proofs are treated largely as independent artifacts, and knowledge reuse is limited to static textual objects retrieved on a per-proof basis. While such keyword-based retrieval can provide useful contextual hints, it often fails to capture the structural dynamics of proof construction in large verification developments. In practice, both automated systems and human proof engineers construct proofs through sequences of incremental transfor-mations of proof states, where each step modifies the goal structure, introduces new assumptions, 4 Ahn et al. 

or reduces the remaining subgoals. These transformations form characteristic proof-state transi-tion patterns that recur across different proofs. However, when retrieval is performed solely at the level of entire lemmas or proof scripts, these finer-grained structural relationships are often lost. Our intuition originates from how human proof engineers actually construct proofs. Rather than relying on surface-level syntactic similarity between the current goal and its context, they rea-son about how the proof structure evolves over time. They also select lemmas based on whether their semantic roles align with the current proof state, rather than merely matching tokens or textual similarity. From a data perspective, large verification projects naturally expose this behav-ior through rich traces of proof-state transitions, capturing how goals, assumptions, and contexts evolve during successful derivations. These traces encode both structural information in proof progression and implicit signals about lemma applicability. This observation suggests that effec-tive proof reuse requires jointly modeling (1) structural proof evolution and (2) context-sensitive, semantically aligned lemma usage. Building on this observation, we develop PROMISE, a structure-aware proof generation framework that explicitly captures and leverages both aspects. First, PROMISE models proofs as sequences of proof-state transitions and performs structural retrieval to identify previously observed reasoning paths that are analogous to the current proof state. This enables the system to reuse how proofs progress, rather than merely what artifacts they contain. Second, to support semantically appropri-ate lemma selection, PROMISE integrates context-aware lemma retrieval by extracting the set of available lemmas from the proof environment (e.g., via Isabelle PIDE ) and selecting those whose functional roles align with the current goal state. These two components are tightly coupled during generation: structural signals guide the reasoning trajectory, while semantically relevant lemmas ground each step in valid logical transformations. Importantly, PROMISE is model-agnostic and operates with off-the-shelf language models without additional training, enabling consistent ap-plication across different LLM backends while preserving a unified, state-aware proof-generation strategy. To evaluate the effectiveness of this approach, we conduct an empirical study comparing PROMISE with existing LLM-assisted proof generation methods. Our evaluation focuses on two key aspects: absolute proof-generation performance and sensitivity to variations in the underlying language model. Under the same query budget, PROMISE consistently achieves substantially higher proof success rates than prior approaches. Moreover, the results indicate that the proposed framework is significantly less sensitive to the choice of LLM backend. In particular, the performance differ-ence between Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct [12 ] and GPT-3.5-Turbo remains minimal within our framework, whereas existing approaches typically exhibit large performance gaps across models. These results suggest that leveraging structural information from proof-state transition traces pro-vides a more robust and scalable foundation for LLM-assisted theorem proving in large verification developments. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• Structural view of proof generation. We introduce a new perspective that frames auto-mated proof generation as a process-level reasoning problem over proof-state transitions, rather than as keyword-based retrieval or tactic prediction. This view identifies structural proof evolution as a first-class signal for reasoning in large-scale verification. 

• Structure-aware proof generation framework. Building on this perspective, we de-velop PROMISE (PRO of MI ning via Structural Embeddings ), a model-independent frame-work that operationalizes structural reasoning by retrieving and leveraging proof-state transition patterns to guide state-aware proof search. PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 5

• Comprehensive empirical evaluation. We conduct an extensive evaluation of PROMISE on system-scale verification benchmarks derived from seL4, comparing against prior ap-proaches (Selene ) under the same query budget. Our results show that PROMISE consis-tently achieves higher proof success rates while remaining robust across different LLM backends, including Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct and GPT-3.5-Turbo. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the background and moti-vation for LLM-assisted proof generation in large verification developments. Section 3 describes the design and methodology of PROMISE. Section 4 introduces the evaluation setup, including benchmarks and evaluation metrics. Section 5 presents our experimental results and discussion. Section 6 reviews related work, and Section 7 concludes the paper. All auto generated proofs as-sociated with this work are publicly available at https://zenodo.org/records/19049360. 

2 Background and Motivation 2.1 Interactive Theorem Proving and Proof-State Transitions 

Interactive theorem proving (ITP ) is a widely used paradigm for constructing mechanically verified proofs in systems such as Isabelle/HOL [25 ], Rocq/Coq [3], and Lean 4 [23 ]. In these environments, proofs are developed incrementally through interaction with a proof assistant, which maintains a formal representation of the current proof state. A proof state typically consists of two compo-nents: a set of goals and a proof context. The set of goals represents logical obligations that remain to be proven, while the context contains local assumptions, definitions, and previously introduced variables. Proof construction proceeds by applying tactics , which transform the current proof state into one or more new proof states. Each tactic application may simplify the current goal, introduce new subgoals, or discharge existing ones. From this perspective, proof development can be viewed as a sequence of proof-state transitions induced by tactic applications: 

𝑠 0𝑡 1

−→ 𝑠 1𝑡 2

−→ 𝑠 2 → ⋯ → 𝑠 𝑛 

where 𝑠 0 denotes the initial proof state derived from the theorem statement and 𝑠 𝑛 denotes the terminal state in which all goals have been discharged. Instead of directly constructing proof terms, proof engineers typically write proof scripts , which are sequences of tactic applications that guide the proof assistant in generating a complete formal proof object. This state-transition view provides a useful abstraction for understanding how proofs evolve dur-ing reasoning. In practice, proofs rarely consist of a single reasoning step. Rather, they are con-structed through sequences of incremental transformations of proof states, where each step mod-ifies the goal structure, introduces new assumptions, or reduces the remaining subgoals. Impor-tantly, many proofs share similar proof-state transition patterns. For example, reasoning sequences such as rewriting followed by simplification, case analysis followed by rule application, or intro-duction of assumptions followed by automated reasoning frequently recur across different proofs. These recurring transition patterns capture reusable reasoning strategies rather than specific proof artifacts. Consequently, understanding proof construction at the level of proof-state evolution pro-vides a useful perspective for analyzing and supporting large-scale formal verification. 

2.2 Large-Scale Verification Proofs 6 Ahn et al. 

> Fig. 2. Benchmark Dependency Graph

While the proof-state transition model pro-vides a general abstraction for interactive theo-rem proving, proofs in large-scale software ver-ification projects show several distinctive char-acteristics that significantly complicate auto-mated proof construction. First, large verification developments contain extensive dependency graphs among defini-tions, lemmas, and theorems. A typical proof obligation rarely stands alone; instead, it re-lies on long chains of supporting results dis-tributed across multiple modules and files. In industrial-scale verification projects such as seL4, FSCQ, and CertiKOS, proof developments consist of thousands of lemmas connected through deep inter-file dependencies. For instance, the seL4 verification project contains more than 100,000 lemmas and theorems, while the CertiKOS verification codebase—together with the CompCert libraries it relies on—contains hundreds of thousands of lines of specifications and proofs. Fig-ure 2 illustrates a portion of the dependency graph extracted from the seL4 verification project, which also serves as the primary target of our methodology. The figure highlights how individual lemmas are connected through long chains of dependencies across modules. Such complex de-pendency structures make automated proof construction particularly challenging, as identifying relevant prerequisites and supporting lemmas becomes nontrivial. Second, many verification proofs in their code base contain a lot of recurring reasoning. Typical examples include rewriting sequences, invariant preservation arguments, and structural reasoning about program states or data structures. These recurring reasoning motifs appear repeatedly across different components of the verification project. However, proof reuse rarely occurs at the level of entire proofs. Instead, proof engineers frequently reuse small proof fragments , which correspond to short sequences of tactics implementing a particular reasoning step. For example, fragments such as rewrite → simpl → apply lemma or intros → destruct → auto commonly appear as parts of larger proofs. These fragments capture localized reasoning strategies that can be adapted across multiple proofs. Finally, the applicability of such proof fragments depends heavily on the local proof context . Tac-tic selection is influenced by several contextual factors, including the current goal, available as-sumptions, and the set of lemmas currently in scope. Consequently, two proof states that appear syntactically similar may require different reasoning steps depending on subtle contextual differ-ences. This strong context sensitivity makes automated proof generation particularly challenging in large-scale verification environments, where both dependency structures and local reasoning contexts must be considered simultaneously. Taken together, these characteristics indicate that scaling proof automation to large verification developments requires additional structural guidance beyond the raw generative capabilities of large language models. 

2.3 LLM-Assisted Proof Generation and Retrieval Limitations 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs ) have renewed interest in automated theorem proving. A growing body of work investigates how LLMs can assist proof development by gener-ating tactics, constructing proofs, or providing proof guidance within interactive theorem proving environments. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into three paradigms: tactic predic-tion, whole-proof generation, and retrieval-augmented proving. PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 7                

> Category Retrieval Unit & Relevance Signal Key Limitation Neural / Embedding Retrieval [4,22 ]Lemmas / proof states, Embedding or graph similarity Lacks structural history RAG-style Retrieval for LLMs [40 ,41 ]Lemmas / proof fragments, Goal–context similarity Limited structural guidance Retrieval + Proof Search [36 ]Lemmas + tactics, Relevance + search score No cross-proof reuse This work (PROMISE )Proof-state transition traces, Structural + dependency signals –

Table 2. Comparison of retrieval paradigms used in automated proof generation systems. Existing ap-proaches primarily retrieve static artifacts such as lemmas or proof fragments, whereas PROMISE retrieves proof-state transition traces to capture structural reasoning patterns across proofs. 

Tactic prediction. The most common formulation treats proof generation as a next-tactic pre-diction problem. Given the current proof state 𝑠 , the model predicts the next tactic 𝑡 , yielding a mapping 𝑠 → 𝑡 . This formulation enables incremental proof construction under proof assistant feedback and allows the model to interact with the proof assistant during the proof search process. 

Whole-proof generation. Another line of work attempts to generate an entire proof directly from the theorem statement, which can be viewed as a mapping problem → proof. While this approach has shown promising results for small mathematical benchmarks, it typically struggles with com-plex verification tasks due to long proofs, deep lemma dependencies, and strong context sensitivity. 

Retrieval-augmented proving. More recent systems incorporate retrieval mechanisms to pro-vide relevant context during proof generation. These systems retrieve artifacts such as lemmas, prior proofs, or proof fragments and provide them as contextual guidance to the language model during generation. By incorporating project-specific knowledge, retrieval-augmented approaches often improve proof generation performance in realistic verification environments. Despite this progress, most existing retrieval mechanisms operate primarily at the level of static artifacts such as lemmas or proof fragments. However, these artifacts do not faithfully capture the true unit of reasoning reuse in proof development. In practice, reusable reasoning often manifests through proof fragments that correspond to short sequences of tactic applications and recurring proof-state transition patterns. Consequently, keyword-based retrieval frequently fails to capture the structural regularities that arise across proofs. This limitation becomes particularly pronounced in large-scale verification environments, where many proofs share similar structural patterns but differ syntactically due to contextual variations. As a result, artifact-based retrieval often returns information that is either too coarse-grained or poorly aligned with the evolving proof state. Table 2 summarizes representative retrieval strategies used in LLM-assisted proof generation sys-tems. While existing approaches incorporate retrieval signals to improve generation, they primar-ily operate at the level of individual artifacts and lack mechanisms for capturing structural rela-tionships across proof-state transitions. 

2.4 Motivating Example 

To describe the limitations of keyword-based retrieval in LLM-assisted proof generation, we present a motivating example from the seL4 verification project. This example compares the retrieval be-havior of PROMISE with that of an artifact-based retrieval approach. Listing 1 shows the target lemma akernel_invs from the AInvs session of the seL4 verification project. PROMISE success-fully generates a correct proof for this lemma. In contrast, an artifact-based retrieval approach following the Rango framework fails to produce a valid proof within its rollout budget. The key difference lies in how the two systems retrieve supporting proofs during generation. 8 Ahn et al. 

PROMISE retrieves the structurally similar lemma shown in Listing 2. The Hoare-triple structure of this lemma closely matches that of the target lemma, and its proof follows the same reason-ing skeleton: unfolding call_kernel and discharging the goal using activate_invs and ac-tive_from_running . Because the retrieved example aligns with the current proof-state transition, it provides an effective template for the language model to adapt. In contrast, the approach based on Rango retrieves the lemma shown in Listing 3. Although this lemma shares lexical similarity with the target, its proof structure differs substantially. The proof begins with a case split over e

and involves a considerably more complex tactic sequence combining wp , simp , and wpc . In prac-tice, this causes the language model to repeatedly generate malformed variants of this heavier reasoning pattern, ultimately exhausting the rollout budget without producing a valid proof. This example highlights a key limitation of keyword-based retrieval. Textual or keyword similarity may identify related lemmas, but it does not necessarily capture the structural reasoning patterns required to complete the proof. In contrast, retrieving structurally aligned proof-state transitions provides more reliable guidance for proof generation, motivating the structure-aware retrieval strategy employed by PROMISE.  

> lemma akernel_invs: "

{invs and ( 𝜆 s. e ≠ Interrupt ⟶ ct_running s) }

> (call_kernel e) :: (unit,unit) s_monad

{𝜆 rv. invs and ( 𝜆 s. ct_running s ∨ ct_idle s) }"   

> unfolding call_kernel_def
> by (wpsimp wp: activate_invs simp: active_from_running)
> Listing 1. Target lemma from the AInvs session
> lemma akernel_invs_det_ext: "

{invs and ( 𝜆 s. e ≠ Interrupt ⟶ ct_running s) }

> (call_kernel e) :: (unit,det_ext) s_monad

{𝜆 rv. invs and ( 𝜆 s. ct_running s ∨ ct_idle s) }"   

> unfolding call_kernel_def
> by (wpsimp wp: activate_invs simp: active_from_running)
> Listing 2. Top structural few-shot example retrieved by PROMISE
> lemma call_kernel_valid_pdpt[wp]: "

{invs and ( 𝜆 s. e ≠ Interrupt ⟶ ct_running s) and valid_pdpt_objs }

> call_kernel e

{𝜆 _. valid_pdpt_objs }"    

> apply (cases e, simp_all add: call_kernel_def)
> apply (rule hoare_pre)
> apply (wp | simp add: if_apply_def2 | wpc | rule conjI | clarsimp simp: ct_in_state_def | erule pred_tcb_weakenE | wp (once) hoare_drop_imps)+
> done
> Listing 3. Top proof retrieved by Rango PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 9
> Fig. 3. PROMISE Main Pipeline

3 Methodology 3.1 PROMISE 

Figure 3 illustrates the architecture of PROMISE. Instead of generating a complete proof in a single pass, PROMISE incrementally constructs proofs through short tactic-level continuations. PROMISE begins by obtaining the initial proof state of the target lemma, including the current goal and active assumptions, through the Scala–Isabelle bridge. This information defines the root proof node. PROMISE then expands this node using the command generator 𝒞 (Figure 4 ). Here, 

𝒞 denotes a subroutine that takes one or more proof nodes and returns up to 𝑁 𝑖 proof commands for the next search depth-𝑖 . Applying the top-𝐵 candidates returned by 𝒞 to the root proof state yields 𝑁 1 depth-1 proof-state nodes. Here, 𝐵 denotes the beam width, and 𝑁 1 denotes the number of command candidates (𝑁 1 ≤ 𝐵 ) that execute without error on the current proof state. At depth 1, PROMISE passes all 𝑁 1 depth-1 proof-state nodes to 𝒞 to obtain 𝑁 2 candidates. These candidates produce the depth-2 proof-state nodes. This process repeats until the search reaches the predefined depth bound 𝐷 . If no candidate closes the proof by depth 𝐷 , then PROMISE immediately termi-nates the whole proof generation pipeline and returns the message ‘[ BEAM ] failed to find proof within depth limit ’. Otherwise, it attaches a proof terminating candidate to the proof prefix of the corresponding depth-𝐷 proof state node to make a final proof script and terminates successfully. 

Remark 1. A proof is accepted only when a candidate both closes the current proof state and passes a final whole-theory consistency check. 

3.2 Command Generator 𝒞 

The command generator 𝒞 takes one or more proof-state nodes from the current frontier and returns verified proof commands for expanding the next search depth. Algorithm 1 illustrates what exactly happens inside the command generator 𝒞 :

(1) For each node in the current frontier, perform the following steps. a. Retrieve structurally related proof fragments and relevant theorem names, b. Construct a grounded few-shot prompt, c. Generate candidate proof steps using the language model, d. Normalize and statically filter the generated candidates, e. Verify candidates in Isabelle 

(2) Collect all successful candidates produced from the current frontier. 

(3) Select top-𝐵 candidates among them. a. If there is no successful candidates, return fail .b. If any candidate closes the proof, return Q.E.D. c. If fewer than 𝐵 candidates succeed, return all successful candidates. 10 Ahn et al.  

> Fig. 4. Command Generator 𝒞

Remark 2. If the regeneration limit is 𝑅 > 1 , then Steps (1)–(3) can be repeated up to 𝑅 − 1 

additional times. 

3.3 Proof-State Search Model 

PROMISE performs beam search over Isabelle proof states. Each node in the beam represents a partially constructed proof together with its current proof context. Formally, a beam node is rep-resented as 

𝑛 = (𝜋, 𝜎, 𝐴, 𝑔, 𝑘), 

where 𝜋 denotes the current proof prefix, 𝜎 the Isabelle proof state, 𝐴 the active assumption set, 

𝑔 the current goal text, and 𝑘 the number of remaining subgoals. The initial node is obtained by probing the target theorem in an isolated working theory using a Scala–Isabelle bridge. This probe produces the initial proof state together with its assumptions, goal text, and subgoal count. During search, candidate proof steps are appended to the proof prefix and executed in Isabelle to produce successor proof states. Verified successors are ranked by a beam scoring function and retained to form the next beam. The proof search algorithm operating on this proof-state representation is described next. 

3.4 Core Proof Search Algorithm 

Algorithm 2 describes the core proof search procedure of PROMISE. In fact, if you have a solid understanding of the Algorithm 1, this is actually a very simple algorithm. It iteratively invokes the command generator 𝒞 at each search depth. During the loop, if 𝒞 returns ‘FAIL ’, then it also returns ‘FAIL ’. If 𝒞 does not return ‘Q.E.D ’ for all depth, then PROMISE also returns ‘FAIL ’. With the behavior of 𝒞 defined, we can now describe the overall search procedure of PROMISE. Algo-rithm 2 performs beam search over the proof states defined above. Starting from the initial proof state of the target theorem, PROMISE iteratively expands the current beam. For each node, the system first constructs a retrieval-grounded context by identifying structurally related proofs and relevant theorem names. This context is used to build a grounded prompt for the language model, which then generates candidate proof continuations. The generated candidates are normalized and PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 11 

Algorithm 1 Command Generator (𝒞 )

Require: Current beam frontier ℬ𝑖 = {𝑛 1, … , 𝑛 𝑚 } with 1 ≤ 𝑚 ≤ 𝐵 , beam width 𝐵 , regeneration limit 𝑅 , candidate budget 𝐶 , target theorem 𝜏 

Ensure: Q.E.D., FAIL, or the next frontier of size at most 𝐵  

> 1:

for 𝑟 ← 1 to 𝑅 do  

> 2:

Succ 𝑖 ← ∅  

> 3:

for all 𝑛 = (𝜋, 𝜎, 𝐴, 𝑔, 𝑘) ∈ ℬ𝑖 do ▷ Context construction  

> 4:

𝑇 ← StRuctuRalRetRieval (𝑔, 𝜏 )  

> 5:

𝑁 ← NameRetRieval (𝑔, 𝐴, 𝜏 ) ▷ Prompting and candidate generation  

> 6:

𝑃 ← BuildPRompt (𝑛, 𝑇 , 𝑁 )  

> 7:

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← GeneRateCandidates (𝑃, 𝐶) ▷ Normalization and filtering  

> 8:

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← NoRmalizeAndFilteR (𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑, 𝑛, 𝑁 , 𝜏 ) ▷ Machine-checked verification  

> 9:

for all 𝑐 in 𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑 do  

> 10:

𝑟𝑒𝑠 ← ExecuteInIsabelle (𝑛, 𝑐)  

> 11:

if PRoofClosed (𝑟𝑒𝑠) and FullTheoRyChecK (𝜏 ) then  

> 12:

return Q.E.D.  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

if MaKesPRogRess (𝑟𝑒𝑠) then  

> 15:

𝑠 ← BeamScoRe (𝑟𝑒𝑠)  

> 16:

𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐 𝑖 ← 𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐 𝑖 ∪ {( Node (𝑟𝑒𝑠), 𝑠)}  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

if Succ 𝑖 ≠ ∅ then  

> 21:

return top 𝑁 𝑖 = min (𝐵, | Succ 𝑖 |) candidates in Succ 𝑖  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

return FAIL filtered to remove malformed syntax, invalid theorem references, and other implausible tactic ex-pressions. The remaining candidates are executed in Isabelle through a Scala–Isabelle bridge to obtain successor proof states. Candidates that close the proof are accepted only if they also pass a final whole-theory consistency check. Otherwise, candidates that make measurable progress are inserted into a successor pool and ranked according to a beam scoring function. The highest-scoring successors form the beam for the next search iteration. The following subsections describe each stage of this pipeline in detail. 

3.5 Retrieval-Augmented Context Construction 

For candidate generation, PROMISE augments each search node with retrieved contextual infor-mation. The framework performs two complementary retrieval operations: structural retrieval and 

name retrieval . The key idea of PROMISE lies in structural retrieval, which identifies previously solved lemmas whose proof-state transition patterns resemble the current proof obligation. This enables the system to reuse recurring proof evolution patterns that arise across large verification developments. Name retrieval, in contrast, plays a supporting role by identifying concrete lemmas 12 Ahn et al. 

Algorithm 2 PROMISE: Retrieval-Grounded Beam Proof Search   

> Require: target theorem

𝜏 , beam width 𝐵 , candidate budget 𝐶 , depth bound 𝐷   

> Ensure: valid proof of

𝜏 or FAIL  

> 1:

(𝜎 0, 𝐴 0, 𝑔 0, 𝑘 0) ← PRobeInitialState (𝜏 )  

> 2:

𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑚 ← {(𝜋 = ∅, 𝜎 0, 𝐴 0, 𝑔 0, 𝑘 0)}   

> 3: for

𝑑 = 1 to 𝐷 do 

▷ Call command generator at depth d   

> 4: if 𝒞 (

𝑁 1, 𝑁 2, ..., 𝑁 𝑛 𝑑 ) == FAIL then      

> 5: return FAIL
> 6: else if 𝒞 (

𝑁 1, 𝑁 2, ..., 𝑁 𝑛 𝑑 ) == Q.E.D then         

> 7: return Q.E.D
> 8: else
> 9: continue
> 10: end if
> 11: end for
> 12: return FAIL

and definitions available in the current proof context. While structural retrieval captures how simi-lar proofs progress, name retrieval determines which concrete facts can be safely used to construct the next proof transition. The key idea of PROMISE is goal-conditioned structural retrieval . Instead of retrieving artifacts based solely on the original theorem statement, the system retrieves previously solved lemmas whose proof-state transition patterns resemble the current proof goal. This allows the search pro-cedure to reuse common proof evolution patterns that arise across large verification developments. Structural retrieval consists of two phases: (1) Database (DB ) construction, (2) few-shot example selection using the DB. In the first phase, we build a database containing structural representations of lemmas. For each lemma included in the database, we execute its original proof commands line by line and record each intermediate goal together with the corresponding remaining proof-command suffix (proof commands which are not executed yet ) into ‘proof_suffix.json ’ during the process. We then extract the intermediate goal from each record, parse it with the official Isabelle parser, and embed the resulting representation into the database. At inference time, the resulting database is used to guide proof generation for the target lemma. The retrieval procedure is as follows : 

(1) Parse the current goal with an official Isabelle parser, 

(2) Retrieve top-30 scoring intermediate goal from DB, 

(3) Rerank those with respect to semantic similarity with the target lemma, 

(4) Choose top-8 reranked intermediate goal, 

(5) Get proof suffixes corresponding to those states from proof_suffix.json , and 

(6) Insert them as a fewshot examples in the prompt We next define the scoring metrics used for ranking and reranking. Each retrieved lemma is first assigned a structural similarity score 

𝑠 struct = (1 − 𝑑) + 𝛼 ⋅ min (𝑚, 𝑐 max ) + 𝛽 ⋅ ℓ, (1)

where 𝑑 denotes the embedding distance between the query and the candidate lemma, 𝑚 is the number of overlapping constants, ℓ measures the lexical overlap between the goals, and 𝛼 and 𝛽 are weighting constants. Because structural similarity alone may retrieve proofs that are syntactically related but semantically irrelevant, the retrieved lemmas are further reranked with respect to the PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 13 

semantic similarity: 

𝑠 rerank = 0.55 𝑠 struct + 0.35 𝑠 goal + 0.10 𝑠 const , (2)

where 𝑠 goal measures similarity between the current goal and the retrieved lemma ’s initial goal, and 

𝑠 const captures overlap in constants and salient symbols. This second-stage ranking favors lemmas that are not only structurally similar but also semantically close to the target lemma. The following example illustrates how these two scores complement each other. During proof generation for the lemma lookup_cap_and_slot_valid_fault using PROMISE, at the certain proof state, pure structural ranking would keep not_empty_lc in the top-8 retrieved lemmas: it took 3rd place by raw structural score with 𝑠 struct = 0.43. However, it was reranked with respect to the rerank score 

𝑠 rerank by the expression (2). Despite its moderate structural similarity 𝑠 struct , not_empty_lc had relatively weak semantic relevance to the target lemma: its goal-similarity and constant-overlap terms were only 

𝑠 goal = 0.15, 𝑠 const = 0.18, 

so its final score became 

0.55(0.43) + 0.35(0.15) + 0.10(0.18) = 0.31. 

As a result, not_empty_lc fell from third place in the pure structural ranking to 14 after semantic adjustment and was no longer retained in the top-8 few-shot pool. By contrast, get_ipc_buffer_words initially ranked much lower than not_empty_lc under pure structural retrieval: ranked 8th with 𝑠 struct = 0.34. But its semantic relevance to the target lemma was much higher than not_empty_lc , with 

𝑠 goal = 0.82, 𝑠 const = 0.09, 

which gives 

𝑠 rerank = 0.55(0.34) + 0.35(0.82) + 0.10(0.09) = 0.48. 

This promoted get_ipc_buffer_words from 8th under raw structural ranking to 3rd after se-mantic reranking. Similarly, thread_set_tcb_fault_handler_update_invs rose from rank 9 to rank 4. This example shows why reranking is necessary: a lemma that would have been selected by 

𝑠 struct alone is displaced by lemmas with lower-structural similarity but stronger semantic align-ment with the goal once 𝑠 goal and 𝑠 const are taken into account. PROMISE does not reuse the retained lemmas as full proofs. Instead, PROMISE extracts tactic templates from them by preserving the overall proof shape while abstracting away the concrete theorem arguments. These templates serve as few-shot exemplars that illustrate how similar proofs typically evolve, guiding the language model toward plausible proof-state transitions rather than encouraging direct proof copying. 

Name Retrieval . In addition to structural retrieval, name retrieval determines which concrete facts are available for constructing the next proof step. Its primary purpose is to ground candidate generation in the set of lemmas and definitions that are valid in the current proof context. For each beam node, PROMISE constructs a grounded vocabulary of theorem and definition names that are likely to be useful for the current proof state. This vocabulary is assembled by aggregating candidates from four complementary sources: 

(1) Implicit lemma names inferred from constants and identifiers appearing in the current goal, 

(2) Character-𝑛 -gram retrieval over theorem names and lemma texts in the repository, 

(3) Interactive theorem search within the live Isabelle context, and 

(4) Verified definitional lemmas. 14 Ahn et al. 

Because lemmas ending in _def are not explicitly defined in the codebase, PROMISE cannot rely on a static whitelist for them. PROMISE therefore proposes candidate _def lemmas by appending 

_def to constants or identifiers that appear in the current goal state. PROMISE then filters these candidates through Isabelle to remove unavailable lemmas. A second, more grounded source of 

_def names is Proof-IDE (PIDE ), which provides _def lemmas available in the current proof con-text. Combining these two sources yields a set of plausible _def lemma candidates. The role of name retrieval differs from that of structural retrieval. While structural retrieval cap-tures how similar proofs typically evolve by identifying reusable proof-state transition patterns, name retrieval identifies which concrete facts can be safely used in generated commands. The re-trieved names are organized into semantic role buckets, including definitions, simplification lem-mas, rule-style lemmas, and WP/refinement lemmas. These categories are used to ground prompt construction and constrain candidate validity. 

Verification of Definitional Lemmas . To ensure that unfolding hints used during generation are valid in the current proof context, PROMISE explicitly verifies candidate definitional lemmas with Isabelle. Definitional lemmas, particularly those ending in _def , cannot always be reliably recovered from static repository text alone. Therefore, PROMISE queries Isabelle directly to check whether each candidate definitional lemma is available in the active proof environment. Only lem-mas confirmed by Isabelle are retained, ensuring that all unfolding hints supplied to the language model are context-valid rather than merely textually plausible. 

Leakage Prevention . To prevent proof leakage, PROMISE explicitly excludes the target theorem from all retrieval stages. Structural retrieval omits the target theorem by name, and name-based retrieval results are filtered to remove any references to it. A final safety pass further eliminates any remaining self-references. As a result, the original proof of the target theorem is never used as a retrieval exemplar or a hint source during search. 

3.6 Grounded Few-Shot Prompting 

From the current beam node and the retrieved context, PROMISE constructs a grounded few-shot prompt for next-step generation. The prompt includes the current goal, active assumptions, the proof prefix accumulated so far, compact feedback summarizing recent failed attempts, structurally retrieved tactic templates, and the retrieved theorem names organized by role. A key component of the prompt is method diversification. PROMISE estimates which tactic fam-ilies are promising for the current state by combining three signals: the current goal family, the methods observed in retrieved tactic templates, and persistent coverage statistics accumulated from previously successful state transitions. Methods are ranked lexicographically according to goal-family compatibility, local evidence from retrieved templates, global rarity, and repository-level prevalence. From this ranking, the system derives (i) method targets , which specify desired coverage across tactic families, and (ii ) candidate method slots , which assign preferred initial meth-ods to specific candidate positions. This discourages collapse into a single overused method family and encourages a controlled diversity of candidate tactics. The model is prompted to generate a fixed number of short candidate next steps, typically one or two Isabelle commands per candidate, subject to the grounded facts and method preferences encoded in the prompt. 

3.7 Candidate Normalization and Static Filtering 

To guarantee syntactic validity and contextual grounding before machine-checked verification, PROMISE applies a deterministic normalization and filtering stage prior to verification. The raw PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 15 

language-model outputs are first transformed into a canonical candidate list through a repair pro-cess that standardizes syntax, resolves aliases, removes malformed fragments, and replaces weakly grounded theorem references with retrieved context-valid names when possible. Nevertheless, the generated outputs may occasionally be weak, for example, when they are highly repetitive, malformed, or insufficiently diverse. In such cases, the system augments the candidate pool with grounded fallback candidates constructed directly from retrieved theorem names and tactic schemas. These fallback candidates are assembled from validated facts and predefined tactic patterns, such as simplification, rule application, or WP-style reasoning. This mechanism ensures that the candidate pool remains grounded even when the generative output is unreliable. After normalization, each candidate is subjected to deterministic static checks. Candidates are rejected if they are empty, duplicated, syntactically implausible, dependent on unknown methods, excessively timeout-prone, reliant on unresolved tactic variables, or reference facts outside the grounded allowed set. Candidates that reference the target theorem itself are also discarded. These checks eliminate obvious failure modes before Isabelle execution and significantly reduce wasted verification effort. 

3.8 Machine-Checked Verification 

To guarantee the semantic correctness of generated proof steps, PROMISE verifies all surviving candidates through machine-checked execution in Isabelle. Each candidate is appended to the parent proof prefix and executed via the Scala–Isabelle bridge to probe the resulting proof state. For each execution, the verifier obtains the successor proof state, successor assumptions, successor goal, and the number of remaining subgoals. Verification results are memoized using a normalized task signature so that duplicate state transitions are not re-executed. A candidate execution may yield one of three outcomes. First, the candidate may fail, in which case it is discarded and its failure signal is summarized into compact error feedback for future regeneration. Second, the candidate may partially succeed by transforming the proof state without completing the proof; in this case, it becomes a scored successor node for further search. Third, the candidate may appear to close the proof locally. Even in this case, PROMISE does not accept the proof immediately. Instead, the system reconstructs the full proof in the isolated theory and requires the entire Isabelle build to succeed. This final check ensures that locally closed proofs are also globally valid within the full theory environment. 

3.9 Beam Scoring and Adaptive Update 

To prioritize promising proof states during search, PROMISE assigns a beam score to each verified successor based on proof progress, proof compactness, and tactic diversification. Let 𝑘 parent and 

𝑘 child denote the parent and successor subgoal counts, respectively. The immediate progress gain is defined as 

Δ = max (0, 𝑘 parent − 𝑘 child ). (3)

The beam score of a successor node is computed as 

𝑠 beam = −𝑘 child − 0.01𝐿 + 0.25Δ + 𝑏(𝑚), (4)

where 𝐿 is the resulting proof-prefix length and 𝑏(𝑚) is an optional diversification reward associ-ated with the first method 𝑚 used by the candidate. This reward is defined as 

𝑏(𝑚) = min (𝛾 cap , 𝛾 𝑤 

1 + √𝑢(𝑚) ) , (5)16 Ahn et al. 

where 𝑢(𝑚) is the accumulated usage count of method 𝑚 , 𝛾 𝑤 is a reward weight, and 𝛾 cap is a reward cap. This scoring formulation favors candidates that reduce subgoals, maintain concise proofs, and explore less-saturated tactic families. After scoring, all verified successor nodes from the current frontier are pooled and ranked. The next beam is formed by selecting the highest-scoring successors up to the active beam width. The beam width and candidate budget may be adjusted dynamically in response to timeout pressure and observed progress. When the nominal depth bound is reached but promising frontier states remain, the search depth may be extended up to a predefined hard cap. 

3.10 Termination 

PROMISE terminates successfully only when a candidate sequence both closes the local proof state and passes the final whole-theory Isabelle check. Otherwise, the search terminates unsuccess-fully after exhausting the beam horizon, regeneration budget, or adaptive search limits. Overall, PROMISE is therefore a retrieval-grounded, machine-checked, beam-search framework for incre-mental theorem proving, rather than a single-shot language-model decoding procedure. 

4 Evaluation Setup 

Benchmark and Isabelle/HOL setup. We evaluate PROMISE on a benchmark of 223 Isabelle/ HOL theorems achieved from the seL4 l4v development. The whole benchmark is defined in 

benchmark.json and is evenly split into 100 P1 tasks and 100 P2 tasks, excluding 23 P3 lemmas. The theorems come from both library and proof-oriented developments, including lib/Monads ,

proof/invariant-abstract , proof/infoflow , proof/sep-capDL , and proof/access-control .This choice of source theories is deliberate: it is intended to cover a broad but coherent range of reasoning patterns within the Isabelle/HOL verification ecosystem. lib/Monads contributes generic monadic definitions, weakest-precondition rules, and reusable proof infrastructure that appears throughout the seL4 proofs. proof/invariant-abstract captures the core invariant-preservation arguments over the seL4 abstract specification, while proof/access-control and 

proof/infoflow add relational and security-oriented reasoning about integrity, authority confine-ment, confidentiality, and noninterference. proof/sep-capDL contributes a different proof style based on separation logic over the capDL model, including frame-style and heap-decomposition arguments. As a result, the benchmark is neither restricted to generic library lemmas nor con-fined to one narrow verification layer: it evaluates whether a prover can handle reusable algebraic reasoning, monadic Hoare-style proofs, system-specific invariant arguments, security proofs, and separation-logic reasoning within the same maintained corpus. For each benchmark instance, we isolate the target theorem into a temporary working theory, construct fresh dependency and tar-get sessions, and interact with Isabelle through a Scala–Isabelle bridge. A theorem is counted as solved only if the synthesized proof both closes the local proof state and passes a final whole-theory Isabelle build. This evaluation protocol avoids false positives and ensures that all reported successes correspond to replayable Isabelle/HOL proofs. 

Why seL4? Our goal is to automate formal verification for large-scale systems, and recent stud-ies have made such attempts on a few large-scale systems. Among them, We decide to use seL4/ l4v as a benchmark because it includes interactive proof datasets that are both large in scale and technically very challenging, yet hold significant practical importance in real-world systems. The seL4 project established the first machine-checked functional-correctness proof for a complete general-purpose operating-system kernel, connecting an abstract specification to the kernel ’s C implementation [17 ]. Subsequent work extended this result into a broader proof stack that includes binary correctness, access-control enforcement, information-flow security, and other end-to-end PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 17 

assurance arguments [14 , 15 , 24 ]. In sum, l4v is not a collection of isolated textbook lemmas: it is a decent verification system spanning abstract specifications, executable models, refinement proofs, C-level reasoning, and security proofs. This makes l4v particularly suitable for evaluating proof generation performance of large language models. Good performance on this corpus requires substantially more than local tactic imitation. A prover must handle long-range dependencies, premise selection in a large theory graph, proof-state-sensitive tactic generation, and reasoning across multiple abstraction levels. These demands align closely with the intended capabilities of retrieval-augmented and state-aware LLM proving systems. The benchmark is also structurally diverse: the repository exposes specifications, refinement layers, access-control and information-flow proofs, binary-verification components, and proof-engineering infrastructure within a single Isabelle/HOL development [34 ]. In the snapshot used in this work, a simple scan of verifica-tion/l4v found 2,016 Isabelle theory files, approximately 66,913 theorem-style declarations, and 14,776 definition-style declarations. For our intermediate-goal retrieval experiments, replay over this snapshot yielded 72,749 indexed proof states. A further advantage is that seL4/l4v is an actively maintained, open-source project rather than a static benchmark assembled solely for theorem prov-ing. The project positions seL4 as a high-assurance foundation for safety- and security-critical sys-tems, and official materials emphasize the continuous maintenance of its proofs as the implemen-tation evolves [31–33 ]. This plays an important role in selecting benchmark for LLM-based proof generation: a useful benchmark should reflect the realities of real-world proof engineering, where generated proofs must remain valid within a large, continually updating codebase. For these rea-sons, seL4/l4v provides a demanding, realistic, and reliable benchmark for research on automated proof generation with language models. 

Models and hardware. All experiments are run on Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS on a server with 96 logical cores, 503 GiB of RAM, and four NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPUs (49 GB each ). We evalu-ate PROMISE with multiple language-model backends: Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct , GPT-3.5-turbo , and GPT-4.1 . We used GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4.1 to compare PROMISE performance with Selene. Additionally, in order to establish the scale-invariance of our framework, we incor-porated Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct as a leaner alternative to the larger ones we used (GPT-3.5-turbo , GPT-4.1 ). Unless otherwise stated, all systems in a given comparison use the same underlying model backend. 

Compared systems and re-implementations. We compare PROMISE against two representative retrieval-augmented theorem-proving baselines, Selene and Rango. Since the original Selene arti-fact is not publicly available, we implemented our own version following the algorithm and evalu-ation protocol described in the paper. In our experiments, the behavior of this re-implementation with GPT-4.1 closely matches the trends reported in the original Selene paper, which provides ev-idence that the implementation is faithful enough for comparison. In contrast, the original Rango artifact is publicly available, but it targets Rocq/Coq rather than Isabelle/HOL. We therefore re-implemented an Isabelle/HOL version of Rango by following its published retrieval, prompting, and search procedure as closely as possible within the Isabelle setting. The re-implemented ver-sions may not fully match the original ones. However, for convenience, we will refer to these re-implemented versions as the original model name in this paper. 

Baseline configurations. For Selene, we use the standard ACC#1 and ACC#5 protocols: one at-tempt with temperature 0.0 and five attempts with temperature 0.5, respectively. Temperature, which ranges from 0 to 1, controls the randomness of LLM responses: values close to 0 lead to more conservative and deterministic responses, while values closer to 1 produce more diverse and less predictable outputs. Hence such adjustment enables us to evaluate LLM ’s proof generation 18 Ahn et al. 

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct 

Method Selene ACC5 Selene ACC30 Increase PROMISE P1 30.0% 40.0% +10.0 pp 77% P2 2.0% 5.0% +3.0 pp 36% P3 8.7% 13.0% +4.3 pp 30.4% 

> Table 3. Accuracy comparison between Selene ACC5, Selene ACC30, and PROMISE on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct.

performance across different levels of creativity. In both cases, we use five demonstrations, top-

𝑝 = 0.95 , a maximum output length of 2,048 tokens, and a verification timeout of 600 seconds. We use a verification timeout of 600 seconds to balance fairness and practicality. This budget is long enough to accommodate nontrivial Isabelle replay and automation costs on the harder l4v theo-rems, but also short enough to keep evaluation bounded and to avoid letting a few pathological instances dominate runtime. For Rango, we use rollout search with 20 rollouts and a maximum of 24 steps per rollout, BM25 proof retrieval with top-𝑘 = 8 , TF–IDF lemma retrieval with top-𝑘 = 12 ,and temperature 1.0. The original Rango evaluation is primarily controlled by a per-lemma time-out. In our Isabelle/HOL setting, however, repeated interaction with Isabelle through the Scala– Isabelle bridge incurs substantial overhead for retrieving proof states and probing candidate steps. Under a pure wall-clock budget, some lemmas terminate before enough rollout steps are explored, even though successful proof trajectories may still exist. We therefore use a fixed rollout-step bud-get, capping each rollout at 24 steps, to reduce the distortion introduced by bridge overhead and to obtain a more stable comparison across lemmas. This fixed budget is conservative relative to PROMISE, which issues about 30 LLM queries per lemma on average on the same benchmark. For Selene, Table 3 demonstrates that increasing retrial budget does not affect success rate dramati-cally as the prompt remains the same regardless of the number of queries. In addition, the Table 3 also shows that Selene ’s improved accuracy is much lower than the success rate of PROMISE. Therefore, we just used the Selene ’s default retrial limit (ACC1, ACC5 ) in our evaluation. 

PROMISE configuration. Unless otherwise stated, PROMISE uses the default retrieval-grounded beam-search configuration described in Section 3. The search starts with beam width 6 and regen-eration limit 2. The initial depth bound is 10, and the search may extend this bound by one step at a time up to a hard cap of 12 when promising successor states remain. Candidate generation uses temperature 0.9. Moreover, PROMISE starts with 12 candidates per state. Candidate verifica-tion uses a 120-second timeout per machine-checked probe. During search, PROMISE adaptively adjusts both beam width and candidate budget according to timeout pressure and observed proof progress. 

Prompt Design. Figure 5 is a simplified PROMISE prompt example. PROMISE uses a single, high-density prompt that provides the language model with a complete snapshot of the current proof state, including current goal state, active assumptions, the partial proof prefix, and verifier feed-back for the previously probed proof commands. In order to facilitate structural information, the prompt contains up to five proof templates retrieved via structural retrieval. We deliberately hide lemma names used in those templates in order to clearly separate structural retrieval and name re-trieval pipelines. Moreover, to make the generative process reliable as much as possible, the prompt provides a role-partitioned theorem inventory. This inventory categorizes accessible premises into PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 19 

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct GPT-3.5-turbo GPT-4.1 Method P1 P2 P3 P1 P2 P1 P2 Selene ACC1 22 2 2 34 9 46 15 

Selene ACC5 30 2 2 42 14 54 23 

Rango 57 21 3 35 14 47 35 PROMISE 77 36 7 85 40 69 33 

Table 4. Evaluation results on the full benchmark, grouped by proof level. 

functional groups-definitions, simplification facts, introduction/elimination rules, and WP/refine-ment lemmas. Finally, the model is asked to synthesize diverse candidates of tactic sequences by following the human-like proof reasoning principle we gave to it. 

Remark 3. As finishing the proof in a single line is not feasible for challenging lemmas in most cases and is not consistent with our iterative proof mining approach, we forced the language model to use ’apply ’ command instead of using ’by ’ command, which is used for single line proofs. 

System role. Isabelle/HOL proof engineer for seL4/l4v. 

Task. Generate exactly 8 diverse next-step candidates (1–2 commands each ) for the current checked goal. Prefer retrieval-grounded tactics and use apply -style commands only. 

Current state. 

- Goal {invs and ( 𝜆 s. e ≠ Interrupt ⟶ ct_running s)} call_kernel e {𝜆 rv. invs and ( 𝜆 s. ct_running s ∨ ct_idle s)} 

- Assumptions none - Proof prefix none - Feedback avoid context-local pseudo-facts such as assms , this , that , and thesis 

Structural retrieval templates. 

- T1 apply simp → apply (wpsimp wp: <WP/refinement lemma>) 

- T2 apply (cases x) → apply (simp add: <Def/Simp names>) 

- T3 apply (rule <Rule lemma>) → apply simp 

Role-partitioned theorem inventory. 

- Defs/Simp invs_def , call_kernel_def , and_def , …

- Rules intro , spec , allE , conjE , …

- WP/Ref. activate_invs , do_user_op_invs , kernel_entry_invs , timer_tick_invs , …

Generation contract. 

- Grounding use only names from the theorem inventory; never invent lemmas or copy hidden template names - Reasoning follow structure first, then instantiate grounded names, and favor progress– making next steps over one-shot closure - Diversity cover multiple tactic families (simp , rule , wp , struct ) and avoid near-duplicates - Output return exactly 8 short apply -style candidates, each a plausible next proof step 

Fig. 5. Simplified PROMISE prompt example. 

5 Evaluation 

Table 4 shows our benchmark results. As each proof level contains 100 problems except for P3 ,the raw counts in the table directly deduce success rates. In order to ensure practical scalabil-ity and localizability for complex proof engineering, we evaluate P3 lemmas exclusively using 20 Ahn et al. 

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, rather than larger proprietary models like GPT-3.5-turbo or GPT4.1. Notably, PROMISE demonstrates superior accuracy on P3 , correctly proving 7 lemmas-more than double the performance of the best baseline, Rango (3). For P1 /P2 , PROMISE achieves 77/36 on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, 85/40 on GPT-3.5-turbo, and 69/33 on GPT-4.1, corresponding to over-all success rates of 56.5%, 62.5%, and 51.0%, respectively. Averaged across all seven model-level settings, PROMISE reaches 55.7%, substantially above Rango (34.0% ), Selene ACC5 (26.8% ), and Selene ACC1 (20.9% ). Importantly, PROMISE obtains the best result in six of the seven evaluated settings, with the only exception being GPT-4.1 on P2, where Rango remains slightly higher (35 vs. 33 ). 

Why PROMISE Does Not Surpass Rango on GPT-4.1/P2. The only case in which PROMISE does not outperform Rango is GPT-4.1 on P2. The difference is 2%. We conjecture that this ex-ception arises from the interaction between model capability and prompt strictness. GPT-4.1 is substantially stronger than earlier models at instruction following, long-context comprehension, distractor filtering, and multi-hop reasoning [26 ]. Recent evidence further suggests that, for strong models, few-shot chain-of-thought prompting does not necessarily improve reasoning: zero-shot CoT can match or exceed few-shot CoT, and the model often focuses primarily on the instruction rather than learning additional reasoning skill from the exemplars [7]. More generally, analyses of CoT prompting show that intermediate reasoning steps often function mainly to communicate task format or task understanding, rather than to teach a genuinely better solution procedure [21 ];other studies likewise find that CoT prompting can be beneficial in some sequential reasoning set-tings but detrimental in others, and that adding more in-context examples does not consistently help [2]. Related prompt studies also report that prompt format can matter more than detailed de-scriptive instructions [35 ]. Taken together, these findings suggest that PROMISE ’s beam-fewshot prompt may have overconstrained GPT-4.1 on hard P2 goals by prescribing a narrower reasoning protocol than the model would otherwise choose. Because GPT-4.1 is especially strong at follow-ing nuanced instructions, it may have adhered more faithfully to this less efficient scaffold instead of exploiting its own stronger latent reasoning strategy. Rango ’s prompt, being less prescriptive while still providing iterative proof-state guidance, likely leaves more room for GPT-4.1 to choose an effective search trajectory, which plausibly explains why Rango retains a slight advantage only in this setting. 

Comparison with Selene. PROMISE consistently outperforms Selene, including Selene ’s stronger ACC5 configuration, across all models and both proof levels. The absolute gains over Selene ACC5 are +47 and +34 points on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, +43 and +26 on GPT-3.5-turbo, and +15 and +10 on GPT-4.1 for P1 and P2, respectively. This gap is notable because Selene ACC5 already allows multiple attempts, whereas Selene ACC1 corresponds to a single attempt. The relatively modest improvement from ACC1 to ACC5 suggests that repeated single-shot generation alone is insufficient; the larger gains of PROMISE instead come from retrieval-guided proof search. 

Stability across LLMs. PROMISE also exhibits stable behavior across model families. On P1, its success rate remains between 69% and 85%, and on P2 between 33% and 40%. The overall spread across Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, GPT-3.5-turbo, and GPT-4.1 is 11.5 points, which is smaller than the variation observed for Rango and Selene. This result suggests that PROMISE does not de-pend on a particular LLM family to be effective; rather, the retrieval-and-mining strategy transfers well across both open-weight and proprietary models. 

Keyword retrieval vs. structural retrieval, and single-shot vs. iterative mining. The com-parison with Selene and Rango helps isolate the source of the improvement. Selene represents PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 21 Success rate (%) P1        

> 020 40 60 80 100
> 22 30 57 77
> Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct
> 34 42 35 85
> GPT-3.5-turbo
> 46 54 47 69
> GPT-4.1
> P2
> 020 40 60 80 100
> 2221 36
> Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct
> 914 14 40
> GPT-3.5-turbo
> 15 23 35 33
> GPT-4.1 Each proof level contains 100 benchmarks, so counts equal percentages.
> P3
> 010 20 30 40
> 8.7 8.7 13.0 30.4
> Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct P3 contains 23 benchmarks; bar heights and labels show success rates. Selene ACC1 Selene ACC5 Rango PROMISE

Fig. 6. Evaluation Result 

a single-shot setting with repeated attempts (ACC1/ACC5 ), while Rango performs iterative min-ing with keyword-based retrieval over proof states and lemmas. PROMISE further strengthens iterative mining with two complementary retrieval channels: structural retrieval, which surfaces proofs with analogous shapes and reusable tactic patterns, and name retrieval, which provides con-crete lemma and definition names needed to instantiate those patterns. This combination yields clear gains over keyword-based iterative mining in five of the six settings: compared with Rango, PROMISE improves by +20/+15 on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, +50/+26 on GPT-3.5-turbo, and +22 on GPT-4.1/P1, while trailing by only 2 points on GPT-4.1/P2. Overall, these results indicate that structural retrieval and name retrieval are both effective, and that their benefit is amplified when used inside an iterative mining loop rather than in a purely single-shot pipeline. 

6 Related Works 

Recent work on LLM-assisted theorem proving and software verification has rapidly expanded across multiple proof assistants, including Rocq/Coq, Lean, and Isabelle. Existing efforts can be broadly grouped into several directions. Those directions include large-scale benchmarks and environments, logic- and search-based automation, retrieval-augmented proving, tactic & proof abstraction, and decomposition- or agent-based reasoning. Our work is most closely related to retrieval-augmented proving, but differs in a crucial way. Prior approaches typically retrieve ar-tifacts such as premises, lemmas, whole proofs, or nearby textual context, whereas we focus on retrieving structural reasoning units that better reflect how proof knowledge is reused across large proof developments. 

Large-scale benchmarks . A first line of work has developed datasets and environments for eval-uating LLMs on formal reasoning. LeanDojo [40 ] provides a retrieval-augmented environment for Lean and established the premise-selection-plus-tactic-generation paradigm for theorem prov-ing. Selene [41 ] introduced a project-level benchmark for industrial software verification based on seL4 [16 ], emphasizing complex inter-file dependencies, isolated verification environments, and whole-proof generation in Isabelle. Rango contributed CoqStoq [36 ], a large Rocq/Coq corpus containing 2,226 repositories and 196,929 theorems, together with a benchmark targeting well-maintained real-world projects such as CompCert [20 ]. More recent work has extended evalua-tion beyond mathematical reasoning to system-software verification, for example using FSCQ [6]

as a benchmark for proof search over a realistic verified file system. Collectively, these efforts 22 Ahn et al. 

demonstrate that large-scale proof developments differ substantially from small mathematical benchmarks: they exhibit deep dependency graphs, strong context sensitivity, and extensive intra-project reuse. 

Logic- and search-based proof automation . Before the emergence of LLM-assisted proving, sub-stantial progress had been made in automating proofs through logic-based and search-based tech-niques. In Isabelle, Sledgehammer [5] integrates automated theorem provers and SMT solvers with the interactive proof environment, automatically selecting premises and reconstructing proofs in-side Isabelle. CoqHammer [8] brings a similar architecture to Rocq/Coq by combining premise selection, automated theorem prover based proof search, and proof reconstruction. These systems have proven highly effective at discharging many proof obligations automatically. More broadly, SMT-based verification frameworks such as Verus [18 ] and Dafny [19 ] leverage automated solvers to reason about program properties encoded as verification conditions. Once a program specifica-tion is translated into a suitable logical fragment, these systems can automatically discharge large classes of verification obligations. However, these approaches primarily rely on logical encodings and solver-driven proof search rather than reuse of knowledge from existing proof corpora. Their automation strength depends mainly on the expressiveness of the underlying logic and the ca-pabilities of external solvers. In contrast, LLM-assisted approaches try to leverage reusable proof knowledge embedded in large proof developments themselves. 

Retrieval-augmented proving . A large body of work augments proof generation with retrieved context. LeanDojo [40 ] retrieves relevant premises for Lean proofs. Rango [36 ] extends this idea in Rocq/Coq by retrieving both relevant lemmas and similar prior proofs from the current project and updating retrieval dynamically as the proof state evolves. Empirically, Rango shows that retrieving similar proofs—not just lemmas—substantially improves synthesis performance; its proof retriever alone contributes a large fraction of the gain over non-retrieval variants. In FSCQ-based proof search, additional project-level context likewise improves proof coverage. These systems clearly demonstrate that retrieval is valuable for large proof developments. However, the retrieved objects remain primarily artifact-level units such as premises, proof scripts, theorem statements, or nearby textual context. As a result, they often provide context that is semantically relevant but structurally too coarse to capture the precise reasoning step required at the current proof state. 

Whole-proof generation, repair, and agentic verification . Others treat proof automation more holistically. Baldur [9] studies whole-proof generation/repair with LLMs. Selene similarly evalu-ates end-to-end proof generation and iterative fixing using verifier feedback in the seL4 setting. Recent agentic systems push this further. An experience report on CertiCoq [27 ] shows that an LLM-assisted workflow produced an approximately 7,800-line Rocq proof for administrative nor-mal form correctness by adapting an existing continuation-passing style proof template, illustrat-ing the growing feasibility of large verified developments under human guidance. These systems are compelling, but their reuse mechanism is still usually framed at the level of full proof templates, surrounding context, or task-specific scaffolds, rather than reusable structural proof patterns. 

Tactic abstraction and proof compression . A closely related direction seeks reusable abstrac-tions below the whole-proof level. TacMiner [38 ] discovers tactic libraries from existing Rocq proofs using tactic dependence graphs, learning more tactics than a prior baseline, reducing proof corpus size by 26%, and improving Copra [37 ]’ s proof automation success rate from 22% to 60%. This work highlights that reusable proof knowledge often lies in recurring tactic patterns rather than in complete proof scripts. However, tactic discovery primarily focuses on constructing re-usable macros or compressing existing proofs offline. Structural retrieval takes a different ap-proach. Instead of only learning reusable tactics offline, it retrieves structural analogues of the PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 23 

current reasoning situation online—such as proof-state transition motifs, role-aligned fragments, or subgoal evolution patterns—and uses them to guide next-step proof generation. 

Decomposition, reinforcement learning, and subgoal reasoning . A further line improves prov-ing through decomposition and reinforcement learning. DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [29 ] uses recursive theorem proving, subgoal decomposition, synthetic cold-start data, and reinforcement learning to bridge informal reasoning and formal proof construction in Lean. More recent systems such as Aristotle [1] combine Lean proof search with informal reasoning and lemma generation at scale, while Harmonic publicly positions Lean as the backbone of its formal verification pipeline. These approaches show that decomposition is powerful, especially for long-horizon mathematical rea-soning. Nevertheless, they mostly address how to generate or search over subgoals, rather than how to retrieve the right reusable structure from past proofs inside a large software-verification corpus. Structural retrieval is therefore complementary: it can serve as the retrieval substrate that supplies decomposition-aware, role-aware, and state-aware analogues from prior proofs. 

Cross-assistant translation and proof transfer . Some recent efforts explore cross-assistant transfer. lf-lean [10 ] studies Rocq-to-Lean verified translation at scale through automatically gener-ated correctness specifications, and related blog and infrastructure efforts suggest that translation and environment generation may become a practical source of large verified datasets for future training and evaluation. This line is highly relevant to future generalization of our setting across proof assistants. However, the translation objective is still largely instance-level and semantics-preserving. It does not directly model which structural reasoning patterns survive across assis-tants or across projects. Structural retrieval offers one possible abstraction layer for such transfer, since proof-state transitions, local tactic motifs, and lemma roles may generalize more robustly than surface syntax. 

Summary . In summary, prior work has shown the value of retrieval, decomposition, tactic ab-straction, and verifier-guided repair. However, the dominant retrieval granularity remains insuf-ficient levels. We argue that this granularity does not match the true unit of reuse in large-scale verification proofs. By retrieving structural reasoning units rather than only keyword-level re-trievals, it aims to provide context that is both finer-grained and more aligned with the current proof state. 

7 Conclusion and Future Works 

PROMISE reframes LLM-assisted automated theorem proving from the perspective of scalability in large-scale system verification. While recent approaches achieve strong performance on math-ematical benchmarks and small to medium-sized proofs, we show that they fundamentally fail to scale to real-world verification projects. Our analysis indicates that this limitation does not stem from insufficient reasoning capability of LLMs, but from the inability of existing methods to man-age deep dependency structures and reuse proof knowledge beyond individual proofs. Despite advances in retrieval-augmented and search-based proving, prior techniques remain inherently local, operating on static artifacts and single-proof contexts, which limits their effectiveness at system scale. We argue that scalable proof automation requires retrieval mechanisms that jointly exploit dependency-level signals and proof-structural regularities across proof attempts. As future work, we plan to evaluate our approach on the full seL4 verification corpus to assess scal-ability in a realistic system setting. We also intend to explore learning-based selection strategies, including offline reinforcement learning, to replace heuristic retrieval with data-driven policies optimized for long-horizon verification. 24 Ahn et al. 

References 

[1] Tudor Achim, Alex Best, Alberto Bietti, Kevin Der, Mathïs Fédérico, Sergei Gukov, Daniel Halpern-Leistner, Kirsten Henningsgard, Yury Kudryashov, Alexander Meiburg, Martin Michelsen, Riley Patterson, Eric Rodriguez, Laura Scharff, Vikram Shanker, Vladmir Sicca, Hari Sowrirajan, Aidan Swope, Matyas Tamas, Vlad Tenev, Jonathan Thomm, Harold Williams, and Lawrence Wu. 2025. Aristotle: IMO-level Automated Theorem Proving. arXiv:2510.01346 [cs.AI ]

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01346 

[2] Filippos Bellos, Yayuan Li, Wuao Liu, and Jason Corso. 2024. Can Large Language Models Reason About Goal-Oriented Tasks?. In Proceedings of the First edition of the Workshop on the Scaling Behavior of Large Language Models (SCALE-LLM 2024 ). Association for Computational Linguistics, St. Julian ’s, Malta, 24–34. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.scalellm-1.3 

[3] Yves Bertot and Pierre Castran. 2010. Interactive Theorem Proving and Program Development: Coq ’Art The Calculus of Inductive Constructions (1st ed. ). Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated. 

[4] Lasse Blaauwbroek, Mirek Olsák, Jason Rute, Fidel Ivan Schaposnik Massolo, Jelle Piepenbrock, and Vasily Pestun. 2024. Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum? id=A7CtiozznN 

[5] Sascha Böhme and Tobias Nipkow. 2010. Sledgehammer: Judgement Day. In Automated Reasoning, 5th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 16-19, 2010. Proceedings (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6173 ),Jürgen Giesl and Reiner Hähnle (Eds. ). Springer, 107–121. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-14203-1_9 

[6] Haogang Chen, Daniel Ziegler, Tej Chajed, Adam Chlipala, Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. 2015. Using Crash Hoare logic for certifying the FSCQ file system. In Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . ACM, 18–33. doi:10.1145/2815400.2815402 

[7] Xiang Cheng, Chengyan Pan, Minjun Zhao, Deyang Li, Fangchao Liu, Xinyu Zhang, Xiao Zhang, and Yong Liu. 2025. Revisiting Chain-of-Thought Prompting: Zero-shot Can Be Stronger than Few-shot. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 . Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 13533–13554. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp.729 

[8] Lukasz Czajka and Cezary Kaliszyk. 2018. Hammer for Coq: Automation for Dependent Type Theory. J. Autom. Reason. 61, 1-4 (2018 ), 423–453. doi:10.1007/S10817-018-9458-4 

[9] Emily First, Markus N. Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. 2023. Baldur: Whole-Proof Generation and Repair with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Sympo-sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (San Francisco, CA, USA ) ( ESEC/FSE 2023 ). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1229–1241. doi:10.1145/3611643.3616243 

[10 ] Jason Gross, Vishesh Saraswat, Jeffrey Chang, Harshikaa Agrawal, Vaidehi Agarwalla, Robert Zhang, Twm Stone, Jacob Green, Shiki Vaahan, Lawrence Chan, and Rajashree Agrawal. 2026. lf-lean : The frontier of verified software engineering. Theorem Blog (feb 2026 ). https://theorem.dev/blog/lf-lean/ 

[11 ] Liang Gu, Alexander Vaynberg, Bryan Ford, Zhong Shao, and David Costanzo. 2011. CertiKOS: a certified kernel for secure cloud computing. In Proceedings of the Second Asia-Pacific Workshop on Systems (Shanghai, China ) ( APSys ’11 ). 

Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 5 pages. doi:10.1145/2103799.2103803 

[12 ] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, Kai Dang, Yang Fan, Yichang Zhang, An Yang, Rui Men, Fei Huang, Bo Zheng, Yibo Miao, Shanghaoran Quan, Yunlong Feng, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2024. Qwen2.5-Coder Technical Report. arXiv:2409.12186 [cs.CL ] https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12186 

[13 ] Saketh Ram Kasibatla, Arpan Agarwal, Yuriy Brun, Sorin Lerner, Talia Ringer, and Emily First. 2025. Cobblestone: A Divide-and-Conquer Approach for Automating Formal Verification. arXiv:2410.19940 [cs.LO ] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2410.19940 

[14 ] Gerwin Klein, June Andronick, Kevin Elphinstone, Toby Murray, Thomas Sewell, Rafal Kolanski, and Gernot Heiser. 2014. Comprehensive Formal Verification of an OS Microkernel. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 32, 1 (Feb. 2014 ), 2:1–2:70. doi:10.1145/2560537 

[15 ] Gerwin Klein, June Andronick, Gabriele Keller, Daniel Matichuk, Toby Murray, and Liam O ’Connor. 2017. Provably Trustworthy Systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 375, 2104 (Sept. 2017 ), 20150404. doi:10.1098/ rsta.2015.0404 

[16 ] Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin, Dhammika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelen, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish, Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood. 2009. seL4: Formal Verification of an OS Kernel. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . Big Sky, MT, USA, 207–220. doi:10. 1145/1629575.1629596 

[17 ] Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin, Dhammika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish, Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood. 2009. seL4: For-mal Verification of an OS Kernel. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .PROMISE: Proof Automation as Structural Imitation of Human Reasoning 25 

ACM, Big Sky, MT, USA, 207–220. https://trustworthy.systems/publications/nicta_full_text/1852.pdf 

[18 ] Andrea Lattuada, Travis Hance, Jay Bosamiya, Matthias Brun, Chanhee Cho, Hayley LeBlanc, Pranav Srinivasan, Reto Achermann, Tej Chajed, Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Jacob R. Lorch, Oded Padon, and Bryan Parno. 2024. Verus: A Practical Foundation for Systems Verification. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (Austin, TX, USA ) ( SOSP ’24 ). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 438– 454. doi:10.1145/3694715.3695952 

[19 ] K. Rustan M. Leino. 2010. Dafny: an automatic program verifier for functional correctness. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning (Dakar, Senegal ) ( LPAR ’10 ). 

Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 348–370. 

[20 ] Xavier Leroy. 2009. A formally verified compiler back-end. Journal of Automated Reasoning 43, 4 (2009 ), 363–446. http://xavierleroy.org/publi/compcert-backend.pdf 

[21 ] Aman Madaan, Katherine Hermann, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. 2023. What Makes Chain-of-Thought Prompting Effec-tive? A Counterfactual Study. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 . Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 1448–1535. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.101 

[22 ] Maciej Mikula, Szymon Tworkowski, Szymon Antoniak, Bartosz Piotrowski, Albert Q. Jiang, Jin Peng Zhou, Christian Szegedy, Lukasz Kucinski, Piotr Milos, and Yuhuai Wu. 2024. Magnushammer: A Transformer-Based Approach to Premise Selection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=oYjPk8mqAV 

[23 ] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and Programming Language. In Auto-mated Deduction – CADE 28: 28th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12–15, 2021, Proceedings . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 625–635. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37 

[24 ] Toby Murray, Daniel Matichuk, Matthew Brassil, Peter Gammie, Timothy Bourke, Sean Seefried, Corey Lewis, Xin Gao, and Gerwin Klein. 2013. seL4: from General Purpose to a Proof of Information Flow Enforcement. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 415–429. doi:10.1109/SP.2013.35 

[25 ] Tobias Nipkow, Markus Wenzel, and Lawrence C. Paulson. 2002. Isabelle/HOL: a proof assistant for higher-order logic .Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

[26 ] OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-4.1 in the API. https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/. Published April 14, 2025. 

[27 ] Zoe Paraskevopoulou, John M. Li, and Andrew W. Appel. 2021. Compositional optimizations for CertiCoq. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, ICFP, Article 86 (Aug. 2021 ), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3473591 

[28 ] Jianxing Qin, Alexander Du, Danfeng Zhang, Matthew Lentz, and Danyang Zhuo. 2025. Can Large Language Models Verify System Software? A Case Study Using FSCQ as a Benchmark. In Proceedings of the 2025 Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (Banff, AB, Canada ) ( HotOS ’25 ). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 34–41. doi:10.1145/3713082.3730382 

[29 ] Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, Hongxuan Tang, Yuxuan Liu, Wenjun Gao, Daya Guo, and Chong Ruan. 2025. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing Formal Mathematical Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning for Subgoal Decomposition. arXiv:2504.21801 [cs.CL ] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21801 

[30 ] Talia Ringer, Karl Palmskog, Ilya Sergey, Milos Gligoric, and Zachary Tatlock. 2019. QED at Large: A Survey of Engineering of Formally Verified Software. Found. Trends Program. Lang. 5, 2–3 (Sept. 2019 ), 102–281. doi:10.1561/ 2500000045 

[31 ] seL4 Foundation. 2026. Fact Sheet. https://sel4.systems/About/fact-sheet.html. Accessed 2026-03-17. 

[32 ] seL4 Foundation. 2026. seL4 White Paper. https://sel4.systems/About/whitepaper.html. Accessed 2026-03-17. 

[33 ] seL4 Foundation. 2026. Verification. https://sel4.systems/Verification/. Accessed 2026-03-17. 

[34 ] seL4 Project. 2026. The L4.verified Proofs. https://github.com/seL4/l4v. GitHub repository, accessed 2026-03-17. 

[35 ] Chenming Tang, Zhixiang Wang, Hao Sun, and Yunfang Wu. 2025. Large Language Models Might Not Care What You Are Saying: Prompt Format Beats Descriptions. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 . Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 26–48. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp.3 

[36 ] Kyle Thompson, Nuno Saavedra, Pedro Carrott, Kevin Fisher, Alex Sanchez-Stern, Yuriy Brun, João F. Ferreira, Sorin Lerner, and Emily First. 2025. Rango: Adaptive Retrieval-Augmented Proving for Automated Software Verification. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada ) ( ICSE 

’25 ). IEEE Press, 347–359. doi:10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00161 

[37 ] Yixiao Wang, Keith E. Green, and Ian D. Walker. 2016. CoPRA: a Design Exemplar for Habitable, Cyber-physical Environment. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(San Jose, California, USA ) ( CHI EA ’16 ). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1407–1414. doi:10.1145/2851581.2892333 

[38 ] Yutong Xin, Jimmy Xin, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D. Goodman, Qiaochu Chen, and Işıl Dillig. 2025. TacMiner: Automated Discovery of Tactic Libraries for Interactive Theorem Proving . https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15761151 26 Ahn et al. 

[39 ] Chenyuan Yang, Xuheng Li, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Jianan Yao, Weidong Cui, Yeyun Gong, Chris Hawblitzel, Shu-vendu Lahiri, Jacob R. Lorch, Shuai Lu, Fan Yang, Ziqiao Zhou, and Shan Lu. 2025. AutoVerus: Automated Proof Gen-eration for Rust Code. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, OOPSLA2, Article 396 (Oct. 2025 ), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3763174 

[40 ] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan J Prenger, and An-imashree Anandkumar. 2023. LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine 

(Eds. ), Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 21573–21612. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/ 4441469427094f8873d0fecb0c4e1cee-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf 

[41 ] Lichen Zhang, Shuai Lu, and Nan Duan. 2024. Selene: Pioneering Automated Proof in Software Verification. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers ), Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds. ). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 1776–1789. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.98