Title: Kintsugi: Learning Policies by Repairing Executable Knowledge Bases

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09487v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:32:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Kintsugi: Learning Policies by Repairing Executable Knowledge Bases 

Teng Cao 1,2,3,* Yu Deng 1,2,3,* Hikaru Shindo 1,3,* 

Quentin Delfosse 1,3† Lanxi Wen 4 Suli Wang 3

Jannis Blüml 1,3 Christopher Tauchmann 1,2,3 Kristian Kersting 1,3,2,5,6 

> 1

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Lab, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany 

> 2

Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI), Germany 

> 3

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany 

> 4

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany 

> 5

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany 

> 6

Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany 

> *

Equal contribution. †Work done while at the Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Lab of the Technical University of Darmstadt; now at Intrinsic AI, Google. 

{teng.cao,yu.deng,kersting}@tu-darmstadt.de 

# Abstract 

Modern embodied agents achieve impressive performance, but their task knowl-edge is often stored in neural weights, latent state, or prompt-bound memory, making individual policy knowledge difficult to inspect, validate, recombine, and reuse. We introduce Kintsugi , a white-box policy-learning framework that treats embodied policy improvement as verifier-gated construction of a typed executable Knowledge Base (KB). Kintsugi represents task-level policy knowledge as com-posable typed entries—predicates, operators, policy schemas, monitors, recovery rules, experience records, and goals—and improves this artifact through local-ized typed edits induced from rollout evidence, rather than relying on test-time language-model reasoning. Between rollouts, a tool-constrained agentic editing loop diagnoses trajectory failures, localizes them to editable KB layers, and pro-poses candidate edits. A deterministic verification gate admits an edit only when the candidate type-checks, the resulting KB executes, and focused validation suc-cess or trajectory-health metrics improve without violating protected-regression checks. At inference, the accepted KB is executed by a deterministic symbolic executor with zero LLM calls. Across long-horizon text-agent benchmarks and rep-resentative object-centric manipulation settings, Kintsugi achieves strong endpoint performance while preserving inspectability, local editability, and verifier-gated deployment. These results suggest that embodied policy improvement can be organized around executable task knowledge. 

# 1 Introduction 

A deployed embodied agent must not only act; it must be maintained. When an agent repeatedly opens the wrong container, misses a precondition, or applies a skill to the wrong object, the central question is not how to resample the next action, but how to repair the task knowledge that made the behavior plausible. Recent embodied policies have made rapid progress by scaling data, models, and action-generation architectures. Vision-Language-Action models [ 14 , 28 , 2 ] and diffusion-style policies can acquire broad perceptual and motor competence [ 4, 6], while world-model methods learn compact latent dynamics for planning and control [ 9]. We view these systems as complementary to our setting: learned perception and motor skills may provide the substrate, but their task knowledge is often stored in parameters, latent state, or prompt-bound memory [ 39 , 23 ]. In such systems, a         

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.09487v1 [cs.LG] 10 May 2026 Agents fail in long-horizon tasks.
> Diverse task settings
> Execution produces rich traces.
> Existing routes don't convert failures into durable, verifiable knowledge.
> End-to-end learning
> Prompt-only agents
> Manual rules /patches
> opaque. brittle. hard to scale
> ...
> Failure traces
> Diagnose Edit Verify
> Learned KB
> ...
> from zero
> zero-LLM execution
> trace grounded
> Pick-Place Drawer Household Planning
> AB
> C
> D

Figure 1: From failure traces to verified policy knowledge. Embodied-agent failures provide rich evidence, but end-to-end learning, prompt-only agents, and manual patches often do not yield durable policy repairs. Kintsugi closes this gap by diagnosing failures, editing a typed KB, and verifier-gating updates into traceable policy knowledge that executes with zero LLM calls at inference. repeated deployment failure does not naturally expose a stable edit locus. Failure evidence therefore often becomes a training example, a fine-tuning datum, or an engineer’s debugging note, rather than a durable correction to explicit policy knowledge [30, 3]. Symbolic planning and neuro-symbolic abstraction learning address the complementary side of this problem because they expose predicates, preconditions, effects, and plans as inspectable structures [ 13 ,7, 15 ]. Classical systems, however, are often hand-engineered and difficult to grow from deployment evidence, while recent learned variants commonly target individual components such as predicate invention, operator learning, continuous-parameter sampling, or domain-specific abstract world models [ 18 , 17 , 10 , 5 ]. LLM-based agents provide another route because they can reflect on failures, generate code, or synthesize plans [ 36 , 16 ], but their conclusions remain prompt-bound or free-form unless extracted into typed executable artifacts and empirically validated [ 20 , 27 ]. The gap we target is therefore not “neural versus symbolic,” but the absence of a policy-maintenance object that turns rollout evidence into typed, executable, and verifier-gated changes. We study white-box improvement of the task-knowledge layer of object-centric embodied policies. The input is trajectory evidence over structured object-centric states and calibrated grounding or skill contracts; the goal is to improve the task policy while keeping decisions and updates inspectable [ 15 ,1]. We call this layer white-box when executable decisions can be traced to typed knowledge entries, and updates are localized, rollbackable edits with evidence and validation records. This separation is a deliberate design stance: by decoupling task knowledge from perception and low-level control, the problem formulation remains agnostic to the learned vision models, state estimators, skill libraries, or task-specific motor policies that provide the substrate. The task knowledge above them is represented as an explicit artifact that can be inspected, edited, replayed, and empirically checked. To instantiate this idea, we propose Kintsugi , a policy-as-editable-knowledge training loop for embodied agents. The name reflects the core design principle: failures are not hidden, but become visible traces for auditable edits to the executable policy artifact. Kintsugi represents task-level policy knowledge as a typed declarative knowledge base (KB) containing grounding rules, predicates, ontology and affordances, operators, policy schemas, monitors and recovery rules, experience records, and goal specifications. Between rollouts, a restricted LLM editor reads trajectory evidence and source contracts, hypothesizes a likely task-knowledge failure layer, and proposes a typed edit. The edit is not accepted because the LLM proposed it: a deterministic applier must type-check the payload, and the resulting KB must pass focused validation and protected-regression checks, which ensure that the edit does not degrade previously solved or explicitly protected behaviors. At inference, Kintsugi makes zero LLM calls. The accepted KB drives the high-level task policy through a deterministic symbolic executor and calibrated skill or action bindings. 2This design tests artifact-centered policy improvement rather than claiming that symbolic policies replace neural robotics. We evaluate whether capability is acquired through KB evolution, whether it resides in the executable artifact, whether behavior can be locally edited, and which KB components are load-bearing. On long-horizon text-agent tasks, Kintsugi evaluates endpoint capability on ALFWorld [ 24 ], WebShop [ 32 ], and TextCraft [ 21 ]. On ALFWorld, we further isolate the artifact claim through a cold-start study, fixed-KB access controls, local editability tests, and component ablations. For object-centric manipulation, MetaWorld [ 34 ] and Predicators [ 26 , 25 ] evaluate KB-driven symbolic policies under compatible state and skill interfaces, while RoboSuite is used as a boundary and failure-localization stress test with simulator state and task-local low-level adapters. Thus the experiments measure success rate, inspectability, traceability, local editability, verifier-gated update discipline, zero-LLM deployment, and the assumptions under which task-level reuse is valid. Our contributions are: • White-box task-knowledge artifact. We formulate embodied policy improvement as constructing and maintaining a durable policy object: an executable typed KB whose high-level decisions, edits, provenance, and validation records are inspectable and replayable under compatible grounding and skill contracts. • Layer-localized typed policy repair. We introduce a verifier-gated training loop in which an offline editor agent diagnoses rollout evidence, localizes candidate failures to editable KB layers, and proposes typed policy edits that are accepted only after deterministic type checking, execution checks, focused validation, and protected-regression checks. • Artifact-centered deployment and evaluation. We deploy the accepted KB, rather than test-time language reasoning, as the high-level task policy, and evaluate endpoint capability, cold-start KB growth, fixed-KB access controls, local editability, component ablations, reuse, and boundary cases across text-agent and object-centric manipulation settings. 

# 2 Background and Problem Formulation 

We study object-centric embodied tasks. At each step, the agent observes a structured state st =

{(oi, c i, p i, r i, . . . )}nt

> i=1

, where objects have categories, attributes, poses or relations, and task-relevant states such as open, locked, reachable, held, or occupied [ 15 , 5]. Given a goal g, the agent acts through a calibrated skill or action interface. Thus the input for policy improvement is object-centric trajectory evidence τ = ( s0, a 0, s 1, a 1, . . . , s T , g ), together with source contracts that define how states, predicates, and skills are exposed [16]. 

White-box policy. The desired output is an executable policy. A standard policy maps state and goal to an action, at = π(st, g ). We instead study a white-box policy form in which decisions are grounded in an explicit artifact K: at = E(K, s t, g ), with Trace( at) ⊆ K. Here E is an executor, and Trace( at) means each deployed policy action can be attributed to specific, identifiable entries in 

K, rather than explained only after execution. 

Problem. Given object-centric rollout evidence, improve the executable policy while keeping updates inspectable and safe. A failure should identify a bounded editable locus ℓ, apply a local update K′ = Apply( K, δ ℓ), and accept the resulting artifact only if it satisfies focused acceptance without protected regression. In our setting, focused acceptance means either higher focused success, 

Mfocus (K′) > M focus (K), or unchanged focused success together with improvement in a pre-declared trajectory-health metric, Mfocus (K′) = Mfocus (K) and Hfocus (K′) > H focus (K). In both cases, protected behavior must not regress: Mprotect (K′) ≥ Mprotect (K). Thus, the central challenge is to turn object-centric failure evidence into persistent executable policy knowledge whose decisions can be traced, locally edited, and validated before deployment. 

# 3 Policy as a Typed Executable Knowledge Base 

Kintsugi instantiates the policy artifact K as a typed executable knowledge base (KB). The purpose of the KB is to make task-level policy knowledge explicit: instead of storing a policy only in parameters, hidden states, prompt text, or free-form code, the KB stores the objects, relations, operators, policy schemas, monitors, recovery rules, experience, provenance, and goals that the executor uses to choose actions. Formally, the artifact is organized as typed layers K = {S0, L 0, L 1, . . . , L 7}, where S0

3Symbolic Executor 

> Zero-LLM Execution
> Trace + Metrics Skill / Action Object State

## Kintsugi: White-Box Policy Learning  typed edits  verifier-gated  zero-LLM inference          

> Initial KB
> schema scaffold
> Household
> Task Rollouts
> Pick-Place Drawer Stack Symbolic Plan
> Accepted KB
> Symbolic Executor
> Action Trace
> no LLM call
> Validation / Deployment Discipline
> type checks
> focused validation
> protected regression
> audit log rollback frozen deployment
> Editing Loop
> 12
> 63
> 54
> Trajectory Evidence
> Restricted Editor Agent
> Verifier Gate Failure-Layer Localization
> Deterministic Apply
> Typed KB Edit
> decide accept/reject
> type
> evidence
> propose
> validate
> Source
> Grounding
> Predicates
> Ontology
> Operators
> Schemas
> Monitors
> Experience
> Goals
> S0
> L0
> L1
> L2
> L3
> L4
> L5
> L6
> L7

Figure 2: Verifier-gated KB editing and zero-LLM policy execution in Kintsugi. During training, a restricted editor uses rollout evidence to localize failures and propose typed KB edits, which are accepted only after deterministic application, focused validation, and protected-regression checks. At inference, the accepted KB drives a separate symbolic-control chain with no LLM calls. Appendix B details the executable KB schema and KBDiff format. names the observation substrate and L0–L7 are editable task-knowledge layers. Appendix Table 4 summarizes the concrete layer vocabulary and representative update loci. Each KB entry has a typed record form e = ( ℓ, k, type , content , prov) , where ℓ is the layer, k is the entry key, type specifies the schema, content stores the executable knowledge payload, and 

prov records provenance such as trajectory evidence or accepted-edit history. This layer structure is designed so that failures have concrete edit loci. If the agent acts on the wrong object, the likely repair may belong to grounding or ontology. If it misses a required condition, the repair may belong to predicates or operator preconditions. If it chooses a poor skill sequence, the repair may belong to policy schemas. If it fails to detect or recover from a bad state, the repair may belong to monitors or recovery rules. Thus the KB is not only a storage format; it is a structured interface for diagnosis, execution, repair, and long-term policy maintenance. The entries are typed so that edits can be checked before execution. For example, a predicate entry specifies its argument types and evaluation rule; an operator entry specifies preconditions, effects, and bound skills; a monitor entry specifies its trigger and recovery target; and a goal entry specifies a task decomposition or terminal condition. Accordingly, we write this requirement as TypeCheck( e, ℓ ) = 1, meaning that entry e conforms to the schema required by layer ℓ. Consequently, a malformed precondition, an operator referring to a nonexistent predicate, or a skill binding with mismatched arguments can be rejected before environment validation. At inference, the accepted KB is consumed by a deterministic executor, at = E(K, s t, g ). We defer the full execution procedure to Section 5; here the key point is that KB entries are executable policy components rather than passive memory. This design realizes the white-box requirements from Section 2: traceable decisions, localized edits, recorded provenance, and verifier-controlled mutability. Appendix B gives the concrete artifact layout, KBDiff payload form, and rule-to-skill decision trace used to instantiate these contracts. 44 Updates as Verifier-Gated Typed Edits 

A typed policy edit is the only mutation channel for learned policy knowledge. It is not free-form code generation or a reflection string [16]. We write an edit as 

∆ = (layer , key , op , payload , evidence , metric , regression _set) .

The concrete operation vocabulary is benchmark-dependent, but the semantics are shared: create or update an entity, predicate, relation, affordance, operator, policy schema, monitor, recovery rule, skill binding, experience record, or goal schema. In implementation, typed edits are stored as KB diffs with explicit payload schemas; at the paper level, the learned object is the typed policy edit rather than the file patch format. A task-local implementation change may be used as a prototype or adapter repair, but it is not an accepted Kintsugi knowledge update until the learned content is distilled into a typed KB edit and validated by the verifier before deployment. 

Example of an accepted edit. Consider a failure in which the agent reaches the goal receptacle while holding the target object, but repeatedly attempts to deposit the object into a closed cabinet. The repair is localized to the deposit policy path rather than to navigation or grasping. A valid typed edit targets L4 Policy schemas, key rule.OpenGoalRecep , with operation add_rule . The payload adds a guard that fires when the task requires deposit, the target object is already held, the agent is at the goal receptacle, and the current receptacle is openable but closed; the corresponding action schema is OPEN . After this rule fires, the existing deposit operator can place the object into the now-open receptacle. The edit is accepted only after focused closed-receptacle placement cases improve and protected open-receptacle, non-openable-receptacle, and object-retrieval cases remain stable; the KB version is then advanced with provenance recorded for later inspection and rollback. Kintsugi evolves the KB through accepted typed edits proposed from rollout evidence. The system has three training-time roles. The editor is a restricted LLM agent that runs only between rollouts; it reads trajectory evidence, localizes the likely failure layer, and proposes a typed policy edit. The 

applier deterministically checks whether the edit is schema-valid and well typed. The verifier decides whether the resulting KB version improves focused success, or leaves focused success unchanged while improving a pre-declared trajectory-health metric, without reducing protected behavior. The editor is therefore a proposal module, not an oracle. Let Kt be the executable KB after iteration t, τt the current trajectory evidence, C the source contracts, and V (Kt) the verifier summary. The editor proposes ∆t = A(τt, C, V (Kt)) . Let Mfocus 

denote the focused endpoint metric, Mprotect the protected-regression metric, and Hfocus a pre-declared trajectory-health metric, such as fewer invalid actions, shorter successful trajectories, fewer recovery steps, or improved subgoal progress. The policy evolves only if deterministic application and validation accept the edit: 

Kt+1 =



Kt ⊕ ∆t, if ∆t type-checks, Mprotect (Kt ⊕ ∆t) ≥ Mprotect (Kt),

and either Mfocus (Kt ⊕ ∆t) > M focus (Kt)

or Mfocus (Kt ⊕ ∆t) = Mfocus (Kt) and Hfocus (Kt ⊕ ∆t) > H focus (Kt),Kt, otherwise. Rejected hypotheses are retained in the audit log, so failed proposals remain evidence without becoming policy, preserving a traceable record of failed alternatives. Figure 2 illustrates how this update rule is instantiated in the closed loop. Each iteration begins with a constrained agent running inside a sandbox whose tools and paths are scoped at the runtime level. The agent invokes a verifier or rollout runner and reads a trajectory-bank summary. Successful, failed, and partial-progress episodes are all evidence, because a success can contain waste or lucky recovery and a failure can contain a reusable subskill. Reading this evidence together with the source contracts of the active environment, the agent performs failure-layer localization: it commits to a hypothesis about which layer in Appendix Table 4 owns the observed failure or trajectory-health issue. The hypothesis constrains the next move to a typed edit drawn from the operation vocabulary admitted by that layer, rather than a free-form policy change. The update is then deterministically applied and schema-checked. Finally, the verifier re-runs focused validation and protected-regression checks. An update is accepted when focused success improves, or when focused success is unchanged and a pre-declared trajectory-health metric improves, with no 5Table 1: Frozen-KB endpoint performance under zero-LLM execution. Kintsugi executes the accepted KB at test time and matches or exceeds long-horizon language-agent baselines on ALFWorld, WebShop, and TextCraft. Kintsugi and access-control rows report mean ± std over 5 seeded runs. 

Method ALFWorld SR (%) WebShop SR (%) WebShop Score TextCraft SR (%) 

ReAct [33] 76.87 32 0.5010 62 Reflexion [23] 82.66 35 0.5204 69 ADaPT [21] 72.39 32 0.5355 77 StateAct [22] 63.43 17 0.2973 68 ExpeL [36] 85.07 29 0.4582 88 WALL-E 2.0 [37] 82.84 34 0.5998 66 AWM [30] 88.81 32 0.5160 66 Dual Memory [31] 94.78 51 0.7132 94 LLM w/o KB 39 .5±1.80 21 ±2 0.5819 ±0.0180 53 ±2

LLM w/ KB prompt 50 ±2.10 47 ±2 0.7300 ±0.0200 55 ±2

LLM w/ KB tools 97 .80 ±0.90 36 ±1 0.7034 ±0.0100 97 ±1

Kintsugi (ours) 100 .00 ±0.00 52 ±1 0.7392 ±0.0080 100 ±0

protected regression. Otherwise the hypothesis is rejected or the KB is restored. This gating is what turns a restricted LLM agent proposal into auditable policy evolution. Appendices C and D detail the restricted harness and the smoke, focused-validation, and protected-regression gates; Appendix B and Table 5 give the KB schema and typed mutation surface. 

# 5 Deployment as Zero-LLM Symbolic Execution 

After training, the accepted KB is frozen and used as the deployed policy artifact. Let K⋆ denote the final accepted KB. At inference step t, the executor receives the object-centric state st, the goal 

g, and deterministically maps them to an action or skill call, at = E(K⋆, s t, g ). The executor E

grounds KB predicates against the current state, selects applicable operators or policy schemas, checks monitors and recovery conditions, and emits the next bound skill or environment action. No LLM call is made during this mapping. This deployment mode separates training-time diagnosis from test-time execution. During training, the restricted LLM agent proposes edit hypotheses, but at inference the actor is the deterministic executor over K⋆. Thus the deployed policy is πK⋆ (st, g ) := E(K⋆, s t, g ), rather than a language-model policy πLLM (st, g ). The verifier controls which edits enter K⋆, and the executor consumes only this accepted artifact during every deployment decision. The executor also provides decision provenance. For each action, the system records a trace 

Trace( at) = {e ∈ K⋆ : e was used to ground, select, monitor, recover, or bind at}. Equivalently, 

Trace( at) ⊆ K⋆, so each deployed action can be attributed to identifiable predicates, operators, schemas, monitors, recovery rules, or skill bindings. This makes zero-LLM execution more than an efficiency choice: it is the mechanism by which the accepted KB becomes the deployed policy. 

# 6 Experiments 

We organize our experiments around five questions that build from endpoint performance to artifact evidence, local editability, cross-domain extension, and layer necessity: (RQ1) Does the final KB achieve strong performance on long-horizon text-agent tasks? (RQ2) Does capability emerge through verifier-gated KB evolution and reside in the executable artifact? (RQ3) Can policy behavior be changed through localized typed KB edits without off-target regression? (RQ4) Does the same KB-driven symbolic-policy interface extend to object-centric manipulation under compatible state and skill interfaces? (RQ5) Which KB layers and executor contracts are necessary for execution, planning, recovery, and maintenance? 6Benchmark protocols. For text-agent evaluation, we follow the Dual Memory-aligned [ 31 ] protocol used for Table 1: ALFWorld [ 24 ] uses 134 valid-unseen games with a 50-step horizon, WebShop [ 32 ]uses 100 public-text shopping sessions for baseline comparison, and TextCraft [ 21 ] uses the 100 AgentGym AgentEval item IDs with a 40-action budget. Appendix F gives the exact banks, horizons, success definitions, and 500-session WebShop diagnostics. For object-centric manipulation, MetaWorld [ 34 ] is evaluated on the MT10 and MT50 multi-task task sets with 50 rollouts per task, a 500-step cap, and the environment binary success predicate; “held-out” refers to held-out reset seeds within the same MT task families, not held-out task families from the ML10/ML45 meta-learning protocol. Predicators-style bilevel-planning environments [ 25 , 5 , 26 ] use 10 seeds and 50 held-out evaluation tasks per environment, with success defined by symbolic goal satisfaction under the planner/executor interface. RoboSuite [ 38 ] is evaluated with simulator-state observations, fixed robot/controller settings, task-specific success predicates, a 500-step cap, and 5 reset seeds per compatible single-arm task. Appendix F gives the exact object-centric protocol, and Appendix J gives the boundary evidence and failure-localization analysis. 

6.1 The Executable KB Outperforms Text-Agent Baselines 

To address RQ1, we evaluate the final accepted KB on ALFWorld, WebShop, and TextCraft. These benchmarks stress complementary forms of task knowledge: object-centric household planning, reward-oriented decision making, and compositional dependency resolution. We compare against representative long-horizon language-agent baselines, including prompt-based acting and reflection methods, decomposition or state-tracking agents, experiential or workflow-memory methods, and recent neurosymbolic or world-model-style agents. These baselines are evaluated as endpoint task-solving systems; in contrast, Kintsugi uses the LLM only between rollouts to propose typed KB edits, and executes the accepted KB with zero LLM calls at test time. Table 1 shows that Kintsugi reaches ceiling performance on ALFWorld and TextCraft and gives a smaller WebShop gain under the fixed-artifact deployment contract. The ALFWorld result indicates that the learned KB can encode the preconditions, effects, schemas, and recovery behavior needed for long-horizon household planning. The WebShop and TextCraft results suggest that the same executable-KB formulation also supports reward-oriented selection and compositional dependency reasoning. Thus, RQ1 establishes the final task capability of the accepted KB; RQ2 later isolates how this capability is acquired and whether it resides in the executable artifact. Appendix G analyzes the baseline families and the fixed-artifact endpoint behavior behind these rows. 

6.2 Capability Resides in the Executable KB Artifact 

RQ1 establishes that the final accepted KB is a strong deployed policy. To answer RQ2, we ask whether this capability is acquired through verifier-gated KB evolution and whether the information needed for action selection resides in the executable artifact. Starting from an empty task-policy scaffold, Kintsugi admits policy knowledge only through verifier-gated typed edits; on ALFWorld, three editing rounds add 13 ADD_RULE edits and improve the artifact from 0.0% to 100 .0% success. This cold-start trajectory shows that task competence is accumulated through accepted KB changes over successive verifier-gated rounds rather than inherited from a pretrained test-time actor. We then freeze the completed KBs and vary only how an actor accesses them, holding the underlying policy knowledge fixed. As shown in Table 1, both KB-access settings improve over a no-KB language actor on most metrics, and typed KB-tool access is especially strong on ALFWorld and TextCraft. These rows show that the accepted KB contains substantial task knowledge that can guide an external language actor. However, direct KB execution performs best overall: Kintsugi runs the accepted KB itself as the policy, rather than asking an LLM to interpret it as context or retrieved facts. This gap supports the artifact-centered claim. The KB is not only informative, but executable: the task knowledge needed for action selection is encoded in a form that the symbolic executor uses more reliably than a test-time language model. Thus, capability is acquired through verifier-gated KB edits, becomes accessible as useful task knowledge to an LLM, and is deployed most effectively when the accepted KB is executed directly with zero LLM calls. Appendix H expands this result into the cold-start ledger, access-control analysis, and task-type diagnostics. 7Iteration 10  Iteration 5  Iteration 1          

> Step 0 Step 25 Step 75 Step 100
> Failure trace
> APPROACH loop
> →localize to L0/L4
> Edit 2: contact-
> aware insertion
> active_variant =
> contact_v2_general
> grasp-settle +
> align-peg window
> Edit 1: handle
> grounding
> target := handle
> square_handle_first_
> approach = true
> Typed KBDiff
> APPROACH APPROACH APPROACH APPROACH
> APPROACH
> APPROACH
> GRASP
> GRASP
> LIFT LIFT
> TRANSPORT DONE

Figure 3: Kintsugi converts failure traces into typed KB edits. In SquareNut, each iteration localizes the current rollout failure to editable KB entries: early APPROACH-loop traces produce handle-first grounding, while later contact/insertion failures produce a contact-aware insertion variant. The accumulated edits let the zero-LLM executor progress through GRASP, TRANSPORT, and DONE, showing iterative trace-to-edit policy evolution. 

6.3 Localized KB Edits Repair Target Behaviors 

To address RQ3, we test whether policy behavior can be changed through localized typed KB updates rather than prompt rewriting, free-form code patches, or parameter updates. The ALFWorld cold-start ledger provides a clean editability test: each failure trace exposes named rules, predicates, states, and admissible actions, making it possible to localize a missing transition, apply a small KB edit, and verify whether the target behavior improves without disrupting behavior that was already solved. Table 2 shows that the accepted edits are local in their effect. The first edit round repairs the basic pick/place transition family; the second repairs the light-use transition; the third repairs the tool-processing chains for clean, heat, and cool tasks. In each case, the target task family moves from complete failure to complete success, while previously solved families show no off-target regression. Table 2: Local KB edits repair behavior without pro-tected regression. Edit Target repair Target Reg. 

0→1 pick/place chain 0/41 → 41 /41 0.0 pp 1→2 light-use transition 0/18 → 18 /18 0.0 pp 2→3 clean/heat/cool chain 0/75 → 75 /75 0.0 pp This supports the white-box mainte-nance claim at the policy-knowledge level. The policy can be inspected through named rules and predicates, the missing transition can be described as a localized KB repair, and the verifier ac-cepts the update only when the focused target improves without breaking pro-tected behavior. Thus behavior changes through small, auditable KB edits rather than opaque retraining or test-time prompt adjustment. Appendix I gives the edit loci, a concrete repair example, and the accepted-edit ledger behind this summary. 

6.4 KB-Driven Policies Extend to Object-Centric Manipulation 

To answer RQ4, we test whether the same KB-driven symbolic policy interface extends beyond text agents to object-centric manipulation. Kintsugi does not learn low-level motor control from scratch; instead, it maps object-centric state to manipulation behavior through grounded predicates, operators, schemas, monitors, recoveries, and skill/action bindings. 8We evaluate MetaWorld, Predicators, and RoboSuite. MetaWorld tests broad single-arm manipulation and held-out reset robustness; Predicators tests symbolic-induction-style manipulation outside text; and RoboSuite tests robot-related manipulation under true policy-action rollouts. MetaWorld uses 

n=50 rollouts per task, Predicators uses 10 seeds × 50 tasks per environment, and RoboSuite uses 15 compatible single-arm tasks with n=5 seeds per task for the reported aggregate result. Success is reported as mean ± standard deviation over the declared endpoint success-rate units. RoboSuite is a boundary study because it tests the symbolic-to-continuous skill interface under simulator-state single-arm rollouts, not an official benchmark ranking. Table 3: Kintsugi extends to object-centric manipula-tion tasks. RoboSuite is reported as transitional bound-ary evidence, not as a canonical official RoboSuite bench-mark comparison. 

Suite Solved Success 

MT-10 held-out 496 /500 99 .2±1.93% 

MT-50 held-out 2458 /2500 98 .32 ±4.13% 

Predicators 1997 /2000 99 .85 ±0.34% 

RoboSuite single-arm 68 /75 90 .7±1.37% 

Table 3 shows that the KB-driven inter-face extends beyond language-only envi-ronments. MetaWorld and Predicators in-dicate that typed predicates, operators, and schemas support broad object-centric ma-nipulation. RoboSuite provides a stricter robot-related check under true policy-action rollouts. The remaining failures concentrate in harder cases, most notably 

tool_hang . Appendix Table 13 gives the per-task breakdown, and Appendix J gives evidence that these drops arise at the symbolic-to-continuous execution boundary: grounding, recovery, scene-conditioned sequencing, and skill/action binding. Figure 3 gives a qualitative RoboSuite example. In SquareNut, Kintsugi converts successive rollout failures into localized KB edits rather than a single monolithic repair. Early traces stall in APPROACH , exposing a handle-grounding failure and yielding a handle-first approach edit. Later traces reveal contact and insertion failures, localized to the policy-schema layer and repaired by a contact-aware insertion variant. The accumulated edits let the same zero-LLM executor progress through GRASP , TRANSPORT , and DONE . This illustrates the RQ4 boundary: Kintsugi can drive object-centric manipulation when state and skill interfaces are compatible, while RoboSuite remains a KB-guided symbolic-control protocol rather than a full visual or real-robot learning claim. 

6.5 Typed KB Layers Are Load-Bearing Contracts 

To answer RQ5, we freeze the final accepted ALFWorld KB and intervene on individual S0/L 0–L7

layers and executor contracts, without retraining or LLM calls. The modified artifact is then executed by the same deterministic executor. Detailed results are reported in Appendix K and Appendix Tables 15 and 16; here we summarize the main failure signatures. The interventions produce structured rather than uniform degradation. Removing the source–grounding–predicate interface disables executable state access; removing ontology and affordances breaks action applicability; removing policy schemas disables action selection; and removing goals erases task decomposition. Operator, monitor, recovery, and experience ablations are less visible in clean rollouts but expose targeted failures in causal-effect reasoning, stress handling, auditability, and rollback. These patterns show that the typed layers are not decorative labels: they define separable contracts for state access, grounding, predicates, world semantics, causal effects, action selection, recovery, provenance, and goals, which is what makes failures localizable and repairs verifier-gated. 

# 7 Related Work 

Symbolic induction from interaction. The closest comparator is work on learning symbolic structure for task and motion planning. [ 15 ] ground low-level skills into symbolic predicates, and [ 8] review how planners combine discrete search with continuous samplers. [25 ] learn symbolic operators for TAMP, while [ 26 ] invent predicates from demonstrations. Related lifelong, language-guided, and visual predicate systems extend this direction through experience, language feedback, visual predicates, and exogenous abstract models [ 19 , 10 , 17 , 18 ]. Our difference is the unit and update path of learning: Kintsugi treats the full executable policy stack as a typed KB, including grounding, affordances, operators, schemas, monitors, recovery rules, experience, and goals. Each accepted update is a localized typed edit induced from traces and accepted by validation, rather than a learned predicate set, operator learner, or domain-specific abstraction search. 9LLM-as-policy and LLM-augmented symbolic methods. Many agents place the LLM inside the inference loop: ReAct [ 33 ] introduced thought-and-action prompting, Reflexion [ 23 ] added verbal reinforcement, Voyager [ 29 ] used an LLM-authored skill library, and AutoManual [ 3] induced actionable manuals through interaction. Other systems externalize reasoning into memory [ 20 , 27 ]or synthesize executable code and symbolic plans [ 16 ]. These approaches improve inspectability or deterministic inference, but their artifacts are often prompt memories, memory extensions, free-form programs, or one-shot symbolic files. Kintsugi instead uses the LLM only between rollouts to propose structured edits; the typed KB, applier, executor, and verifier decide whether an edit becomes policy. 

VLA and world-model policies. Vision-Language-Action models such as RT-2 [ 39 ], Open-VLA [ 14 ], Octo [ 28 ], π0 [ 2 ], and π0.7 [ 12 ] excel at data-scale perception and open-vocabulary control. World-model methods such as Dreamer [ 9] and TD-MPC2 [ 11 ] learn latent dynamics, while diffusion policies such as DP3 [ 35 ] generate actions over 3D observations. Kintsugi is complementary rather than directly comparable: neural perception and motor policies can serve as perception sources or skill bindings, while Kintsugi edits and verifies the symbolic task knowledge above them. 

# 8 Conclusion 

Kintsugi reframes embodied policy learning as white-box policy evolution. Instead of storing improvements in opaque parameters, prompt memories, or unstructured patches, Kintsugi maintains an executable typed KB whose decisions are traceable and whose updates are localized, validated, and replayable. The LLM only proposes typed edits between rollouts; deterministic application and verifier evidence decide whether policy changes. At inference, the accepted KB executes symbolically with no LLM in the loop. For object-centric tasks with calibrated skill interfaces, failures become localized edit hypotheses, and accepted edits become persistent policy knowledge. Kintsugi does not replace neural perception or motor policies, but provides a complementary white-box layer for maintaining, debugging, and reusing task knowledge above them. 

# References 

[1] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. [2] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [3] Minghao Chen, Yihang Li, Yanting Yang, Shiyu Yu, Binbin Lin, and Xiaofei He. Automan-ual: Constructing instruction manuals by llm agents via interactive environmental learning. volume 37, pages 589–631, 2024. [4] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2025. [5] Rohan Chitnis, Tom Silver, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tomas Lozano-Perez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning neuro-symbolic relational transition models for bilevel planning. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) , pages 4166–4173. IEEE, 2022. [6] Yu Deng, Yufeng Jin, Xiaogang Jia, Jiahong Xue, Gerhard Neumann, and Georgia Chalvatzaki. Robot-dift: Distilling diffusion features for geometrically consistent visuomotor control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11934 , 2026. [7] Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of the international conference on automated planning and scheduling , volume 30, pages 440–448, 2020. 10 [8] Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of control, robotics, and autonomous systems , 4(1):265–293, 2021. [9] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 , 2023. [10] Muzhi Han, Yifeng Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu, Ying Nian Wu, and Yuke Zhu. Interpret: Interactive predicate learning from language feedback for generalizable task planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19758 , 2024. [11] Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control. 2023. [12] Physical Intelligence, Bo Ai, Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ashwin Balakrishna, Greg Balke, Kevin Black, George Bokinsky, Shihao Cao, Thomas Charbonnier, et al. π0.7: a steerable gen-eralist robotic foundation model with emergent capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15483 ,2026. [13] Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Hierarchical task and motion planning in the now. In 2011 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation . IEEE, 2011. [14] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [15] George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. From skills to sym-bols: Learning symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:215–289, 2018. [16] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023. [17] Yichao Liang, Nishanth Kumar, Hao Tang, Adrian Weller, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tom Silver, Joao F Henriques, and Kevin Ellis. Visualpredicator: Learning abstract world models with neuro-symbolic predicates for robot planning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .[18] Yichao Liang, Thanh Dat Nguyen, Cambridge Yang, Tianyang Li, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Carl Edward Rasmussen, Adrian Weller, Zenna Tavares, Tom Silver, and Kevin Ellis. Exo-predicator: Learning abstract models of dynamic worlds for robot planning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [19] Jorge Mendez-Mendez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Embodied lifelong learning for task and motion planning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2134–2150. PMLR, 2023. [20] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonza-lez. Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. 2023. [21] Archiki Prasad, Alexander Koller, Mareike Hartmann, Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, Mohit Bansal, and Tushar Khot. Adapt: As-needed decomposition and planning with language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , 2024. [22] Nikolai Rozanov and Marek Rei. Stateact: Enhancing llm base agents via self-prompting and state-tracking. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop for Research on Agent Language Models (REALM 2025) , pages 367–385, 2025. [23] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. volume 36, pages 8634–8652, 2023. 11 [24] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768 , 2020. [25] Tom Silver, Rohan Chitnis, Joshua Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Learning symbolic operators for task and motion planning. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3182–3189. IEEE, 2021. [26] Tom Silver, Rohan Chitnis, Nishanth Kumar, Willie McClinton, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Leslie Kaelbling, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Predicate invention for bilevel planning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 12120–12129, 2023. [27] Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Thomas L Griffiths. Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [28] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. [29] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. [30] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429 , 2024. [31] Bin Wen, Ruoxuan Zhang, Yang Chen, Hongxia Xie, and Lan-Zhe Guo. Aligning progress and feasibility: A neuro-symbolic dual memory framework for long-horizon llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02734 , 2026. [32] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [33] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [34] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , 2020. [35] Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. 2024. [36] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2024. [37] Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. Wall-e 2.0: World alignment by neurosymbolic learning improves world model-based llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15785 , 2025. [38] Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martín-Martín, Abhishek Joshi, Kevin Lin, Abhiram Maddukuri, Soroush Nasiriany, and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293 , 2020. [39] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. 12 A Appendix Roadmap and Evaluation Contract 

The appendix supplements the main text rather than introducing a separate story. Section B expands the policy-artifact and reasoning-site definitions used by the method. Section C describes the restricted agentic training harness, and Section D explains the smoke, focused-validation, and protected-regression gates. Section E states the limited formal guarantees that follow from typed application and verifier-gated acceptance. Section F records the benchmark banks, action surfaces, horizons, and success metrics used by the paper-facing results. Sections G–K then mirror the five experiment subsections: executable KB endpoint performance, capability in the executable KB artifact, localized KB edits, object-centric manipulation, and load-bearing typed layers. 

Shared evaluation contract. All Kintsugi evaluation rows use a fixed-artifact deployment contract. The policy artifact is frozen before test evaluation; the actor is the accepted KB plus a deterministic executor; no LLM call is made during test-time action selection; and success is measured by the benchmark or environment evaluator rather than by symbolic self-certification. Candidate knowledge enters the policy artifact only through typed edits accepted by deterministic application and verifier gates. Debug runs, diagnostic upper bounds, and transitional adapter studies are kept separate from main comparable claims. 

Environment-interface scope. Kintsugi does not assume that an editor must rediscover an environ-ment API from raw bytes. Each benchmark supplies a public interface contract: observation adapter, action or skill binding, success verifier, and the typed mutation surface that a KB edit may target. This is analogous to giving a robot its manual: the policy learner must know what sensors mean, which actions or skills can be called, what arguments they accept, and how success is measured before it can learn a reliable task policy above that interface. In text environments this contract may also include task-family or policy-schema requirements, such as the public ALFWorld action vocabulary and the high-level schemas that the deterministic executor can bind to admissible text actions. These requirements are not episode answers: they do not reveal object locations, hidden product labels, or successful trajectories. The learned object remains the accepted KB/policy artifact authored through KBDiff and validated by rollout evidence. Stronger editor models may infer useful schemas from weaker contracts, but every deployed capability must still enter the same typed artifact and pass the same verifier gate. Thus Kintsugi is general at the controller and mutation level, while a new benchmark still needs an adapter that exposes public state, actions or skills, and the benchmark success signal. The adapter is substrate, not learned policy content.      

> run_loop(K, benchmark_adapter): pre = benchmark_adapter.evaluate(K) diff = propose_kbdiff(summarize(pre.traces), localize(pre), K) K’ = apply_diff(K, diff) # deterministic schema/type gate post = benchmark_adapter.evaluate(K’) keep K’ iff protected does not regress and (focused success improves or focused success is unchanged and pre-declared trajectory health improves)

What the appendix adds. The main text states the white-box claim compactly. Here we unpack the observable requirements behind that claim. The policy state must be inspectable as typed KB entries rather than only as parameters or prompt text. A deployed action must have a trace to the predicates, operators, policy schemas, monitors, recovery rules, or skill bindings that produced it. A learned update must name a layer, key, operation, payload, evidence source, and validation metric. Finally, a candidate update must remain a hypothesis until it passes type checking, focused validation, and protected-regression checks. The following sections show these requirements in the concrete ALFWorld artifact and then report the detailed protocols and results behind each RQ. 

# B Method Details: Policy Artifacts and Reasoning Sites 

This section expands the method definitions from the main text. Kintsugi’s policy state is an executable artifact K, not an unstructured prompt memory. The artifact names an observation substrate S0 and typed policy-knowledge layers L0–L7. The layer vocabulary is used in three places: to execute the 13 Table 4: Kintsugi’s editable policy knowledge hierarchy. S0 defines the observation substrate, while 

L0–L7 provide typed edit loci for grounding, predicates, operators, policies, recovery, experience, and goals, making failures localizable and repairs auditable.                     

> Layer Role Representative contents or updates
> S0Source Oracle or simulator state, tracker output, robot estimator, or visual perception module; declares exposed state information.
> L0Grounding Object schemas, calibration, derived geometry, and target functions; update grounding rules or target functions.
> L1Predicates Grounded facts over objects, relations, contacts, geometry, and task states; add predicates or adjust thresholds.
> L2Ontology Object types, affordances, spatial priors, and articulation types; add object facts or update affordances.
> L3Operators Symbolic preconditions, effects, parameters, and skill bindings; add operators or modify preconditions/effects.
> L4Policy schemas State machines, options, subgoal orderings, and skill-selection logic; add schemas or rebind skills.
> L5Monitors / recovery Success checks, failure detectors, timeout conditions, and recovery policies; add monitors or recovery rules.
> L6Experience Accepted/rejected hypotheses, trajectory evidence, provenance records, and verifier outcomes; append episodes or audit logs.
> L7Goals Task decompositions, goal templates, terminal conditions, and success specifications; add task schemas or update goals.

policy, to localize failures, and to constrain admissible updates. Table 4 summarizes the editable hierarchy. 

Layer contents in the artifact. The layer names are not only conceptual labels; they correspond to concrete fields read by the implementation. S0 names the observation source and the contract by which state enters the executor. In ALFWorld this is the TextWorld state/admissible-command interface; in manipulation settings it may be simulator state, a tracker, or a calibrated robot estimator. 

L0 grounding turns that source into typed object and relation fields, such as current receptacle, inventory, known receptacles, visible contents, and open/closed state. L1 predicates expose Boolean tests over those grounded fields: holds_target , at_goal_recep , current_openable_closed ,

at_process_tool , and can_process_here are ALFWorld examples. 

L2 stores world semantics: receptacle openability, process tools, affordances, object categories, confusable classes, and spatial priors. L3 stores symbolic operator effects, such as the pre/post conditions for take , open , put , clean , heat , and cool . L4 stores executable policy schemas: priority rules, state-machine phases, or option-selection logic. L5 stores or exposes monitor and recovery contracts, such as success checks, failure detectors, and fallback behavior. In ALFWorld, part of this recovery contract is implemented by the executor’s admissible-command fallback rather than learned as a new task rule. L6 stores provenance: accepted and rejected hypotheses, rollout traces, verifier outcomes, and audit records. L7 stores goal templates and task decompositions, such as the sequence for pick_heat_then_place_in_recep .                 

> ALFWorld layer example. S0: TextWorld observation and admissible actions. L0:current receptacle, inventory, known objects, open-state map. L1:ready_to_deposit ,
> at_goal_recep ,current_openable_closed .L2:microwave.tool_for=heat ,
> fridge.tool_for=cool ,cabinet.openable=true .L3:put requires holding the object and the target receptacle being open if openable. L4:OpenGoalRecep and
> DepositHeld rules. L5: executor-side admissible-command fallback and recovery contract.
> L6: accepted-edit ledger and validation result. L7: heat-then-place task schema.

Reasoning sites. Kintsugi deliberately separates three kinds of reasoning that are often conflated in language-agent systems. The restricted LLM editor performs diagnostic reasoning between rollouts: it reads compact trajectory evidence and source contracts, then proposes a failure layer and typed edit hypothesis. This output is not trusted as policy. The deterministic executor performs policy reasoning at deployment: given the accepted KB and current state, it evaluates predicates, fires rules or schemas, checks monitors, and emits a skill or environment action. The verifier performs 14 acceptance reasoning: it decides whether the candidate artifact satisfies focused acceptance—either through improved focused success or through unchanged focused success with improved pre-declared trajectory health—without violating the protected set. Thus the LLM can help generate hypotheses, but it neither acts at test time nor decides which hypotheses become policy. 

KBDiff as the mutation channel. At the paper level, a candidate update is the typed edit 

∆ = (layer , key , op , payload , evidence , metric , regression _set) .

The implementation represents the mutation-facing part of this edit as a typed KBDiff record. The 

op field is drawn from a closed vocabulary such as add_predicate , modify_threshold ,

add_rule , modify_rule_guard , add_skill , add_object_fact , add_task_schema ,

add_operator_schema , add_policy_schema , and add_monitor . The path is a dot-separated lo-cation inside the YAML artifact, such as procedural.rules or semantic.spatial_priors.cup .The payload must match the operation-specific schema. The deterministic applier loads the YAML in round-trip mode, checks the path and payload contract, mutates the in-memory KB, and returns both the new YAML text and an audit record containing the operation, path, rationale, expected effect, and before/after snippets. If the path is missing or the payload is malformed, application fails before any environment validation.        

> Example KBDiff for the closed-receptacle repair.
> op: add_rule path: procedural.rules payload.rule.name: OpenGoalRecep payload.rule.cond: all(task_uses_deposit, ready_to_deposit, at_goal_recep, current_openable_closed) payload.rule.action: OPEN rationale: At the goal receptacle with the held target, closed openable containers must be opened before deposit. expected_effect: closed-container deposit cases improve without changing non-openable deposit cases.

Applier and verifier checks. The grammar table is enforced before a candidate reaches environment validation. The applier rejects edits whose operation is not allowed for the target layer, whose path does not exist, whose payload has missing fields, or whose rule references undefined predicates, skills, objects, or goal schemas. For example, an add_rule KBDiff must supply a rule name, priority or insertion policy, condition, action schema, rationale, and expected effect. The condition must be expressible over L1 predicates or declared helper tests; the action schema must resolve to a bound skill or admissible command; and the expected effect determines the focused validation bank. Only after these structural checks pass does the verifier run rollouts. 

Committed KB entry example. After validation, an accepted edit is no longer just a diff; it becomes a KB entry used by the executor. A simplified committed operator/policy entry for object transfer has the following structure:              

> Name: MoveObjectToReceptacle .
> Layers touched: L2openability fact, L3place operator, L4deposit policy schema, L5
> closed-receptacle recovery monitor.
> Preconditions: target object is held; target receptacle is reachable; if the receptacle is openable, it is open before PUT .
> Effects: object is at target receptacle; hand is empty; deposit subgoal is satisfied.
> Bound skills/actions: navigate, open, put.
> Provenance: induced from failed closed-container deposit trajectories; accepted after focused placement validation with protected open-container and non-openable receptacle regressions unchanged.

This is the concrete reason the KB is auditable: the same entry records what state must be true, which action is emitted, what effect is expected, and which evidence justified the edit. 

From diff to symbolic policy. The training controller calls this path inside a closed loop: VERIFY (Kt) → SUMMARIZE (τt) → LOCALIZE (ℓ)

→ PROPOSE (∆ t) → APPLY (Kt, ∆t) → VERIFY (K′

> t

).

15 Table 5: Typed update grammar used by the verifier-gated applier.                      

> Layer Key type Representative operations Required checks
> S0Source contract Declare source; bind observation field; set read-only source metadata Source contract exists and learned-policy claims do not mutate oracle state.
> L0Grounding key Add or update grounding; calibrate target function; bind visual or simulator field to object slot Payload declares object type, units, source field, and uncertainty or threshold when applicable.
> L1Predicate key Add predicate; add derived relation; change bounded threshold Typed arguments resolve to grounded fields; thresholds are bounded and verifier-visible.
> L2Type or affordance key Add object fact; update affordance; add process-tool or spatial prior Object class is known or declared; affordance is consumed by a valid operator or schema.
> L3Operator key Add operator; add or remove precondition; add effect; bind skill arguments Preconditions and effects resolve to predicates; emitted skill/action type-checks.
> L4Policy schema key Add state machine; add rule; change priority; rebind skill; update termination Rule guards resolve to predicates; priority is explicit; termination condition exists.
> L5Monitor/recovery key Add success check; add timeout/no-progress detector; add recovery rule Trigger, repair target, and protected regression scope are declared.
> L6Evidence key Append trajectory id; record accepted or rejected hypothesis; store verifier outcome Evidence id, focused metric, protected metric, and status are present.
> L7Goal key Add task schema; update decomposition; add terminal condition Decomposition resolves to operators or policy schemas; terminal condition is verifier-measurable.

After a KBDiff is applied, it is not immediately trusted. The controller writes the candidate KB, reruns focused validation and protected-regression checks, and keeps the new artifact only if the verifier accepts it. Otherwise the previous KB snapshot is restored and the rejected hypothesis remains only in the audit log. At deployment, the executor does not read the KBDiff log directly. It reads the accepted KB. In ALFWorld, the rule engine loads procedural.rules , sorts rules by numeric priority, evaluates each rule’s declarative condition against L1 predicates over the grounded state, and returns the first matching action schema. The skill map then converts that schema into an environment command, such as go to microwave 1 , open cabinet 1 , or move cup 2 to cabinet 1 . The environment step produces the next observation; grounding updates L0/L 1; and the loop repeats. This is how the accepted KB becomes the policy at = E(K, s t, g ).

Concrete ALFWorld artifact. In ALFWorld, the KB is not a monolithic list of rules. It separates relatively stable world semantics from executable control. The semantic portion stores object and receptacle facts such as whether a receptacle is openable, which tool realizes a process verb, and where object types are likely to be found. For example, the KB records that a microwave is openable and is the tool for heat , a fridge is openable and is the tool for cool , and a sinkbasin is the tool for 

clean . It also stores task schemas: a pick_heat_then_place_in_recep task decomposes into finding the target object, taking it, navigating to a microwave, opening the microwave, heating the object, navigating to the goal receptacle, opening it if necessary, and depositing the object. The procedural portion of the same KB stores the deployed decision policy. It uses a descending-priority first-match rule policy: the executor evaluates typed conditions over the current grounded state and fires the first rule whose condition is true. A representative rule is OpenGoalRecep : if the task requires deposit, the held target is ready to deposit, the agent is at the goal receptacle, and 16 that receptacle is closed and openable, the action schema is OPEN . The skill binding then emits the admissible text command, such as open cabinet 1 . This is the main distinction between a readable note and an executable artifact: the same entry is used for inspection, action selection, and later edit localization.      

> Rule: OpenGoalRecep .
> Condition: task uses deposit; held target is ready to deposit; agent is at the goal receptacle; current receptacle is openable and closed.
> Action schema: OPEN .
> Purpose: open a closed goal receptacle before attempting DepositHeld .

One decision trace. Consider a heat-then-place task whose target is a cup and whose final receptacle is a cabinet. The observation source S0 exposes the TextWorld state and admissible actions; L7 selects the heat-then-place schema; L2 identifies microwave as the heat tool and cabinet as openable; L1

predicates track whether the target is held, whether the agent is at the microwave or cabinet, and whether the current receptacle is open. The policy schema then follows the trace:            

> SearchUnvisited →GrabTarget →GoToProcessTool →ProcessHere →
> TransportToGoal →OpenGoalRecep →DepositHeld .

Each arrow is a rule decision over named predicates, not a post-hoc natural language explanation. If the rollout fails, the trace narrows the repair locus: failure to find the cup points to grounding or spatial priors; failure to heat points to process-tool semantics or skill binding; failure to deposit into a closed cabinet points to the open-before-deposit rule or openability predicate. 

# C Agentic Training Harness 

The agentic component is a training harness around the typed KB, not an unconstrained code-writing agent. Its purpose is to make the LLM follow the Kintsugi protocol: run the current artifact, read trajectory evidence, localize the dominant failure to an editable layer, propose one typed KB edit, apply it through the deterministic applier, and rerun the verifier. The harness is what turns general LLM reasoning into a bounded policy-improvement procedure. 

Sandboxed workspace. For cold-start runs, the driver creates a run directory containing an empty or scaffold KB, a notes file, a verifier command, and a curated read-only context mirror. The context mirror contains the shared Kintsugi contracts ( kbdiff.py , applier.py , verifier.py ,

verify_kb.py , and related validators) plus environment-specific source contracts. In ALFWorld, those environment files include grounding, predicates, rules, runner, skills, vocabulary, and KB loading code. Production solution KBs, historical result directories, and unrelated repository files are not placed in scope. The tool runtime further restricts the agent: it may read inside the run directory, write only kb.yaml and notes.md , and run only the exact verifier command materialized by the harness. 

What the LLM sees. The prompt tells the agent that the goal is live rediscovery from current failure traces rather than replaying a historical KB. It gives the target success rate, the allowed verifier command, the path of the active KB, the path of the verifier output, and the location of curated source contracts. The LLM therefore sees the same execution interface that the symbolic policy uses: which predicates exist, which skills are declared, what command forms they emit, how rules are evaluated, and how failures are summarized. This is important because the LLM is asked to propose a typed edit against the real executor contract, not to invent a separate policy in natural language. 

LLM model disclosure. We distinguish the training-time editor model from test-time actors. The paper-facing accepted artifacts in the headline text-agent rows are produced by a stronger restricted editor, gpt-5.5 , and then frozen before deployment. We additionally report gpt-4o 

editor diagnostics to test whether the same agentic loop still constructs useful artifacts with a weaker editor. In all cases, the accepted KB produced by an editor run is executed with zero LLM calls at deployment. The ALFWorld LLM-access control rows use gpt-4o for the test-time language actor that interprets either prompt-rendered KB content or KB memory tools. Local scripts may expose other defaults for ad hoc smoke tests, but paper-facing runs should be read from their run manifests. 17 For RoboSuite boundary studies, the model identifier is not a test-time policy parameter because the executed policy is the symbolic executor; diagnostic or agentic runs record their model in the run manifest when an LLM is used to propose edits. 

Protocol guidance. The harness pushes the agent through a fixed sequence. First, it runs the verifier and reads the compact JSON result plus sampled failure traces. Second, it writes a short diagnosis in 

notes.md : what failed, which rule fired, which predicate or skill was missing, and which layer owns the gap. Third, it proposes one KBDiff whose operation and payload match the allowed mutation schema. Fourth, it applies the edit and reruns the verifier. If the edit fails to apply, the applier error is evidence for a corrected diff, not permission to bypass the schema. If the edit runs but does not satisfy focused acceptance, or if it causes protected regression, the candidate is rejected or revised in the next iteration. 

Role of skills. The harness exposes primitive skills as contracts rather than as free-form code targets. In ALFWorld, skills are text-action emitters such as GOTO , OPEN , TAKE , PUT , PROCESS_HERE ,and GOTO_PROCESS_TOOL ; they translate symbolic action schemas into admissible environment commands. In manipulation settings, skills or robot bindings expose calibrated primitives and action-channel assumptions. The LLM can propose a KB edit that selects, reorders, guards, or binds these skills, but an accepted knowledge update must be distilled into the typed artifact. A task-local Python patch can be useful as a prototype or adapter repair, but it is not counted as learned policy knowledge until the behavior is represented as a typed KB entry and passes validation. 

Harness outputs. Each run records the prompt, context manifest, active KB, verifier outputs, sampled traces, notes, accepted/rejected hypotheses, and final summary. The driver also exports a paper-readable KB snapshot that reorganizes the executable artifact into the S0/L 0–L7 presentation used in this paper. These outputs are useful for audit: a reviewer can see which information the agent had, what edit it proposed, whether the deterministic applier accepted the edit, which verifier window was used, and why the candidate was kept or rejected. 

Why the harness matters. Without the harness, an LLM could solve a task by writing arbitrary glue code, remembering a prompt instruction, or overfitting a seed-specific trace. With the harness, the LLM’s degrees of freedom are intentionally narrowed. It may reason about failures and propose hypotheses, but the policy changes only through typed KBDiff updates and verifier evidence. This is what makes the training loop agentic without making the deployed policy an LLM policy. 

# D Verification Details: Smoke, Focused Validation, and Regression 

Kintsugi uses verification at several granularities. These checks serve different purposes and should not be conflated. A smoke test is an inexpensive executable sanity check; it is not a paper result and it is not sufficient for accepting a policy update. A focused validation set tests whether the targeted behavior actually improves. A protected regression set tests whether previously solved behavior remains stable. Only the latter two decide whether candidate knowledge enters the accepted KB. 

Applier smoke tests. The first gate is deterministic and does not touch an environment. Given a 

KBDiff , the applier checks that the operation is in the closed vocabulary, the dotted path exists or is valid for the operation, and the payload satisfies the operation-specific schema. The offline smoke tests cover representative mutation primitives such as modify_threshold , add_predicate , add_rule ,

modify_rule_guard , extend_skill_body , add_object_fact , and modify_priority . They also test that malformed payloads raise a schema error and that the YAML round trip preserves a structurally equivalent artifact. The benefit is immediate: many LLM-generated edit mistakes are caught before spending rollout budget, and the error message can be fed back to the proposer for a corrected typed diff. 

Execution smoke tests. The second gate runs a small number of episodes against the candidate KB. In ALFWorld, the verifier reloads KB-dependent modules so the newly written YAML is actually used, runs n episodes with a fixed horizon, records success rate, mean steps, fired rules, admissible-command misses, and compact failure traces. In cold-start or sandboxed runs, this check is often run with a small n to confirm that the KB is executable: rules can be loaded, predicates can be evaluated, 18 declared skills exist, emitted commands are admissible or recovered, and traces are written. The benefit is fast feedback on integration failures, such as a rule that names a nonexistent predicate, a skill binding that emits an invalid command, or a KB cache that was not refreshed. Passing this smoke gate only means the candidate is runnable; it does not establish the method’s claimed performance. 

Focused validation. Focused validation is the first behavioral acceptance gate. It uses a task family, seed window, or trajectory bank chosen to test the failure that motivated the edit. For example, the 

OpenGoalRecep repair is evaluated on closed-container deposit cases, because that is the behavior the edit is supposed to repair. A process-tool edit is evaluated on clean/heat/cool tasks, not only on generic pick/place tasks. The focused metric may be endpoint success, or a predeclared trajectory-health metric when endpoint success is not expected to change immediately. This prevents a broad or accidental change from being accepted merely because it performs well on unrelated easy episodes. 

Protected regression. Protected regression is the second behavioral acceptance gate. It reruns previously solved task families or a broader fresh-seed window and rejects the candidate if protected behavior regresses. In ALFWorld, after the pick/place family is solved, later light-use or process-tool edits must not break pick/place. In RoboSuite-style boundary studies, a candidate that improves a focused nut-assembly window must also be checked against the broader task set; if it only improves reward or an intermediate residual but fails the environment success predicate, it is recorded as progress rather than accepted policy knowledge. 

Why smoke tests are still useful. Smoke tests are deliberately small because their role is engi-neering control, not statistical evidence. They keep the edit loop cheap and debuggable: the system can reject malformed YAML edits, stale-cache executions, missing skill bindings, and impossible command emissions before running full verifier banks. This makes the expensive checks more mean-ingful. Focused validation and protected regression are then spent on candidates that are syntactically valid, loadable, and executable. The separation also improves auditability: a rejected candidate can be classified as a schema failure, execution failure, focused failure, or regression failure, which is exactly the kind of localized maintenance signal the white-box artifact is meant to provide. 

# E Formal Properties of Verifier-Gated KB Editing 

This section gives the limited formal support behind the update rule in Section 4. The results are intentionally narrow. They prove properties of the typed applier and verifier gate on declared finite validation banks; they do not prove that Kintsugi will solve a benchmark or generalize beyond the tested state distribution. Those broader claims are empirical and are evaluated in Sections 6.1–6.5. 

Objects and assumptions. Let K be the set of well-typed executable KBs. A KB K ∈ K contains entries (ℓ, k, type , content , prov) whose payloads conform to the schema for layer ℓ, and whose executable references to predicates, operators, skills, monitors, and goals are resolvable. Let D be the typed edit space. The deterministic applier is a partial function 

Apply : K × D → K ∪ {⊥} ,

where ⊥ denotes rejection before environment evaluation. The applier returns a KB only after checking that the operation is admitted for the target layer, the payload satisfies the operation schema, and all newly introduced or modified executable references resolve. For a finite trajectory or task bank B, let MB (K) ∈ [0 , 1] be the deterministic success metric obtained by running the executor with KB K on all episodes in B, using the benchmark success signal. Some verifier gates also include a predeclared trajectory-health metric HB (K), such as invalid-action rate or distance-to-goal residual, when endpoint success is not expected to change immediately; when no such metric is declared, the health metric branch below is disabled. For edit t, Tt is the focused validation bank and Pt is the protected regression bank. The acceptance rule is: 

Accept t(K, K ′) = 1 ⇐⇒ K′̸ = ⊥, MPt (K′) ≥ MPt (K),

and either MTt (K′) > M Tt (K)

or  MTt (K′) = MTt (K) ∧ HTt (K′) > H Tt (K).

If the candidate is accepted, Kt+1 = K′; otherwise Kt+1 = Kt and the rejected hypothesis is recorded only as audit evidence. 19 Proposition 1 (Type preservation) . If Kt ∈ K and Apply( Kt, ∆t) = K′̸ = ⊥, then K′ ∈ K .

Proof. The applier only returns a non-⊥ value after validating the target layer, operation, payload schema, and executable references introduced or modified by ∆t. Entries not touched by the edit remain well typed because Kt ∈ K . Therefore every entry in K′ satisfies its layer schema and all executable references are resolvable, so K′ ∈ K .

Proposition 2 (Verifier-set monotonicity) . For any accepted edit at iteration t, the protected metric on the declared regression bank does not decrease: 

MPt (Kt+1 ) ≥ MPt (Kt).

Moreover, the focused bank either improves in endpoint success or preserves endpoint success while improving the predeclared trajectory-health metric. 

Proof. For an accepted edit, Kt+1 = K′ and Accept t(Kt, K ′) = 1 . The three claims are exactly the three behavioral conditions in the acceptance rule: protected success is nondecreasing, and the focused bank either has strictly larger endpoint success or equal endpoint success with strictly larger declared health metric. 

Proposition 3 (Rejected proposals do not change deployment) . If a candidate edit is rejected by the applier or verifier, the deployed KB is unchanged at that iteration: Kt+1 = Kt.

Proof. The update rule assigns Kt+1 = Kt whenever Apply( Kt, ∆t) = ⊥ or 

Accept t(Kt, Apply( Kt, ∆t)) = 0 . Thus a rejected LLM hypothesis can remain in the audit log, but it is not part of the executable policy artifact and cannot affect zero-LLM deployment. 

Scope of the formal claims. These propositions formalize the mechanism that makes Kintsugi con-servative: typed edits preserve the KB schema, accepted edits satisfy their declared focused/protected verifier contracts, and rejected LLM hypotheses cannot silently modify the policy. They are finite-bank guarantees. They do not replace the empirical evidence in the main experiments, and they do not certify behavior outside the state, perception, or skill interfaces covered by the verifier banks. 

# F Benchmark Protocol Details 

This section collects the evaluation protocol details that are referenced from the main experiment section. Keeping them here avoids overloading the headline RQ tables with long descriptions of banks, action surfaces, and success metrics. 

Text-agent protocol. The paper-facing text-agent rows follow the Dual Memory-aligned [ 31 ]evaluation contract used for Table 1. ALFWorld uses the 134 eval_out_of_distribution /valid-unseen games with a 50-step horizon. The actor receives text observations and emits admissible text actions; success is the environment won flag. WebShop uses 100 sessions with IDs 0 . . . 99 , all products enabled, a 15-step budget, public text observations, and only visible clickables or search actions. A WebShop episode is counted as successful when reward r ≥ 0.99 , and the Score column reports mean reward. TextCraft uses the 100 AgentGym AgentEval item IDs with a 40-action budget over get , craft , and inventory ; success is defined by the environment done signal with positive reward. The access-control rows use the same frozen accepted KBs but change the actor interface. The no-KB row gives the language actor no KB context, the prompt row renders the KB as context, and the tool row exposes typed KB retrieval. All LLM access-control rows use gpt-4o-2024-11-20 with temperature zero. The symbolic-executor row runs the accepted KB directly and makes no test-time LLM call. 

Object-centric protocol. MetaWorld is evaluated on MT10 and MT50 with 50 rollouts per task, a 500-step cap, and the environment binary success predicate. The held-out rows use held-out reset seeds within the same task families rather than the ML10/ML45 held-out task-family protocol. Predicators uses four task families, 10 seeds, and 50 evaluation tasks per family per seed, with success defined by symbolic goal satisfaction under the planner/executor interface. RoboSuite is reported as a single-arm boundary study: we use simulator-state observations, fixed robot and controller settings, 20 task-specific success predicates, a 500-step cap, and five reset seeds for each of the 15 compatible single-arm tasks. Focused RoboSuite repair windows are used only to localize accepted and rejected edits; the headline quantitative row is the fixed-artifact single-arm aggregate. 

Scale and reporting. The paper reports episode counts rather than wall-clock time because simula-tor backends and text-environment servers dominate runtime differently across benchmarks. We use two WebShop reporting modes. The baseline-comparable headline row uses 100 sessions because that is the bank used for the literature comparison in Table 1. The full-bank/editor diagnostics use 500 all-product sessions to test the accepted artifact and editor-model construction behavior; these rows are not used as the direct baseline comparison. The remaining appendix experiments use the same fixed-artifact discipline: ALFWorld layer ablations run 120 episodes, MetaWorld uses 2500 episodes per split, Predicators uses 2000 total test tasks, and RoboSuite reports 68 /75 over the 15-task single-arm aggregate. 

Repeated-run statistics. For Table 1, the Kintsugi and LLM access-control rows report sample mean ± standard deviation over five repeated runs under the same declared task banks, budgets, and model setting. Literature baseline rows are copied from their cited reports and are not rerun by us. For fixed-artifact object-centric evaluations, we report the full declared denominators and seed counts rather than a separate significance test. 

Reproducibility artifacts and compute reporting. The supplemental artifact contains the imple-mentation, accepted KBs, evaluation scripts, and curated result manifests needed to reproduce the paper-facing runs; upstream benchmark data are obtained from their original projects rather than redistributed. The paper reports episode counts and protocol settings, but does not fully standardize wall-clock runtime across text servers, simulator backends, and API latency, so exact per-run hardware time should be treated as artifact-level metadata rather than a paper-level claim. Each agentic construction run writes an anonymized audit record. Proposal budgets are computed from the following record schema:     

> proposal_attempt := record contains typed "diff" apply_failed := decision=="apply_failed" or apply_audit.error accepted := decision=="kept" verifier_reject := decision in {"reverted", "verifier_rejected"} total_rejected := apply_failed + verifier_reject

Each counted proposal therefore carries both a typed mutation and a gate decision, summarized in Table 6. Table 6: KBDiff proposal gates for budget accounting. Budget status Gate Evidence and artifact effect 

Attempted Proposal record Typed KBDiff names an operation, path, payload, evidence, and expected effect; counted before acceptance. Apply failed Deterministic applier Invalid operation, path, payload, or unresolved predicate/skill reference; no rollout claim is made and the KB is unchanged. Verifier rejected Focus/protect verifier Candidate applies, but focused success or declared health does not improve, or the protected bank regresses; trace is retained as a rejected hypothesis and the KB is restored. Accepted Commit gate Candidate applies, focused success or declared health improves, and protected behavior is non-regressing; the candidate becomes the next frozen artifact. Result-only Incomplete audit Final benchmark metric may be reported, but proposal counts are excluded from budget totals. Table 7 gives one complete numeric audit for the weaker-editor ALFWorld construction run. The run starts from the empty policy scaffold under the public ALFWorld adapter contract, the text-world 21 analogue of a robot manual, and uses the full 134-game valid-unseen bank at horizon 50 for every verifier call. Table 7: ALFWorld gpt-4o proposal-budget audit. Run Init. Final Prop. Acc. Apply fail Verif. rej. Eval eps. 

ALFWorld gpt-4o 0/134 134 /134 10 10 0 0 1474 The 10 accepted proposals consist of six add_task_schema edits followed by four 

add_policy_schema edits. These edits do not provide episode answers; they teach the artifact how to interpret public task families and invoke the fixed action interface. The first nine edits close verifier-declared contract gaps without changing endpoint success; after the final policy schema is accepted, the frozen KB executes at 134 /134 . Thus the budget counts include interface-health edits as accepted KBDiffs, not only edits with immediate endpoint success gains. For example, the ALFWorld OpenGoalRecep repair is accepted only after the typed add_rule 

payload applies, closed-container deposit cases improve, and protected open-container/non-openable cases do not regress. By contrast, RoboSuite tool_hang frame-grip or wall-insert hypotheses that improve intermediate geometry but leave the environment success predicate false are verifier-rejected: the trace remains audit evidence, but the frozen KB is restored. For a budgeted run, the artifact manifest contains the environment/model contract, final benchmark result, proposal-budget summary, anonymized audit records, and final accepted KB. Rows without complete audit records are marked as result-only and excluded from proposal-budget totals. 

# G The Executable KB Outperforms Text-Agent Baselines 

This section expands Section 6.1 and Table 1. It asks whether the final accepted KB can serve as a strong deployed policy on long-horizon text-agent tasks, while separating endpoint task performance from the protocol details in Section F. The main comparison table reports endpoint task performance, but the key deployment distinction is that Kintsugi evaluates a frozen executable artifact with zero test-time LLM calls. Baseline rows in the main RQ1 table are endpoint task-solving systems drawn from the long-horizon language-agent literature. They are not required to share Kintsugi’s deployment discipline; instead, the comparison asks whether a frozen executable policy artifact remains competitive against prompt-based, reflection-based, memory-based, and state-tracking language agents. The important distinction exposed by RQ1 is therefore both performance and policy object: Kintsugi deploys the accepted KB itself, while language-agent baselines typically continue to choose actions through a test-time language model. The baselines cover several ways of making a language agent more persistent. ReAct [ 33 ] is the prompt-agent foundation: it interleaves reasoning traces with environment actions, so the LLM can update a plan while interacting with ALFWorld or WebShop. Reflexion [ 23 ] keeps the same test-time LLM decision loop but adds verbal reinforcement: failed trajectories are reflected into text and stored as episodic memory for future trials. ADaPT [ 21 ] attacks long-horizon difficulty through as-needed decomposition, recursively breaking a subtask down only when the LLM executor cannot solve it directly. StateAct [ 22 ] is a stronger base-agent prompt: it reinforces the goal at every step through self-prompting and tracks evolving state through a chain-of-states. The memory-oriented baselines move from single-trajectory prompting toward cross-episode experi-ence reuse. ExpeL [ 36 ] gathers training experiences, extracts natural-language lessons, and recalls those insights at inference without fine-tuning the model. AWM [ 30 ] induces reusable workflows from past agent trajectories and retrieves those workflows to guide future action. Dual Memory [ 31 ], the closest paper-facing protocol match for our text-agent evaluation, explicitly separates semantic progress guidance from symbolic feasibility verification: progress memory keeps the agent aligned with the global objective, while feasibility memory checks local constraints. WALL-E 2.0 [ 37 ] is closest to Kintsugi in its use of symbolic environment knowledge: it aligns an LLM-based world model with extracted action rules, knowledge graphs, and scene graphs, then uses the LLM in a model-predictive planning loop. 22 These are strong baselines because they cover the main prior strategies: interleaved reasoning/action, verbal reflection, decomposition, state tracking, experiential memory, workflow memory, dual progress/feasibility memory, and neurosymbolic world-model alignment. Their shared limitation for our claim is where final action selection lives. In all of them, the LLM remains an active test-time actor or planner. Even when memory or symbolic checks are available, the model must retrieve the right information, bind it to the current state, decide which constraint matters, and emit a valid action at each step. Kintsugi changes that boundary by compiling accepted knowledge into an executable KB. At test time, the symbolic executor reads the environment state, evaluates typed predicates and policies, and emits the action directly. The LLM is used only between rollouts to propose candidate edits, and a candidate becomes policy only after deterministic application and validation. 

RQ1 run records and editor-context diagnostics. The headline RQ1 table should be read as the baseline-comparable endpoint comparison under Section F. The accepted artifacts behind those rows were authored by the stronger gpt-5.5 editor and then executed as frozen KBs with zero test-time LLM calls. Separately, full-bank and gpt-4o diagnostics test robustness and weaker-editor construction behavior before deployment. The distinction matters: endpoint rows compare frozen policies to baselines, whereas editor-context diagnostics evaluate proposal quality and convergence of the editor loop. Table 8: Key RQ1 construction records. Benchmark gpt-5.5 

SR / score 

gpt-4o 

SR / score 

ALFWorld 134 /134 = 100 .0% 134 /134 = 100 .0% 

WebShop 290 /500 = 58 .0% / 0.7863 283 /500 = 56 .6% / 0.7620 

TextCraft 100 /100 = 100 .0% 96 /100 = 96 .0% 

The gpt-5.5 columns report the stronger-editor accepted artifacts, deployed with zero test-time LLM calls. The gpt-4o columns report weaker-editor diagnostics: ALFWorld is from-zero under the public policy-schema contract, WebShop reports the extended 500-session all-product diagnostic for the accepted artifact, and TextCraft is a from-zero run. This WebShop row is therefore separate from the 100-session Dual Memory-aligned headline value in Table 1. These records show that the agentic method still works with a weaker editor, but the weaker editor benefits more from explicit schema/interface guidance and shows less stable construction quality. The 100% ALFWorld and TextCraft rows should be read as closure on their declared evaluation banks, not as open-ended generalization. Their credibility comes from repeated fixed-artifact execution, ALFWorld task-type breakdowns, access-control comparisons, and layer ablations. The reason ceiling performance is attainable is structural: ALFWorld valid-unseen tasks and TextCraft recipes have recurring symbolic schemas that can be represented as executable preconditions, dependencies, monitors, and recovery rules. WebShop should also be interpreted as the least natural fit for the current artifact design. Kintsugi is strongest when failures decompose into stable object-centric planning contracts: predicates, preconditions, tool use, subgoal order, monitors, and recovery. WebShop instead stresses retrieval and ranking under incomplete public snippets, hidden decisive attributes, and fuzzy reward matching. The KB can encode query, constraint, and option-binding rules, but it does not control the catalog evidence exposed by search. Therefore the WebShop rows are evidence of a useful but less aligned application, not a clean editor-strength comparison. The ALFWorld editor diagnostic is particularly informative for the claim boundary. In the stronger-editor ALFWorld run, gpt-5.5 reaches 134 /134 after three accepted repair rounds, adding 13 rule-level edits. This is the cleaner from-zero construction evidence used by the main cold-start ledger. In contrast, without the public high-level policy-schema contract, the gpt-4o editor repeatedly proposed malformed or overly local low-level rules and did not converge. With the public environment contract, it added six task-family schemas and four policy schemas, reaching 134 /134 after ten iterations. The final gpt-4o KB contains no learned procedural.rules table and is solved by compiling the 23 accepted policy schemas through the deterministic executor. This supports the intended Kintsugi claim: stronger editors can infer and optimize policy structure faster, while a weaker editor can still construct a verified executable artifact when the environment interface is explicit. In both cases, the deployed policy is the frozen accepted artifact rather than a test-time LLM. 

How symbolic planning is executed. At deployment, Kintsugi does not ask the LLM to write a plan. The executor first maps the benchmark observation and goal into the KB’s typed state. In ALFWorld, this means extracting the target object, required receptacle or tool, inventory state, visible containers, open/closed state, and admissible text actions. In TextCraft, it means reading the requested item, current inventory, known recipes, and available get /craft actions. In WebShop, it means tracking query terms, visible product candidates, options, prices, and hard constraints. The KB then supplies task schemas, preconditions, operator effects, monitors, and recovery rules over this state. Planning is therefore a typed policy evaluation: select the active goal schema, choose the first unsatisfied subgoal, test operator preconditions against the current state, and emit the grounded action whose effect advances that subgoal. The mapping from KB to action is different across the three text benchmarks but has the same structure. In ALFWorld, a goal such as cleaning, heating, or cooling an object maps to an ordered schema: locate the object, pick it up, move to the correct tool, open the tool if needed, place the object, activate or use the tool, retrieve the object, and satisfy the final receptacle goal. Recovery monitors handle common deviations, such as a closed receptacle, an object not found in the first searched container, or a processed object that must be revisited after a tool action. In TextCraft, the target item maps to a recipe dependency graph; the executor repeatedly selects the missing leaf ingredient or craftable intermediate until the final recipe is executable. In WebShop, the policy maintains hard constraints and candidate scores before purchase, but the endpoint is harder because the public observation may not expose the decisive catalog evidence needed for a perfect ranking decision. 

How agentic repair changes the endpoint policy. During training, failed rollouts are converted into localized KB hypotheses. A failure trace is not treated as a general instruction to “try harder.” It is assigned to a layer: missing grounding, missing predicate, missing operator effect, missing policy schema, missing monitor, or missing recovery. The proposer can then suggest a typed KBDiff, such as adding a process-tool schema, adding a revisit rule after microwave/fridge/sink use, or adding a recipe dependency guard. The verifier accepts the edit only if it improves the focused failure family and does not regress protected solved cases. This is why successful endpoint behavior is cumulative: later policies inherit earlier accepted schemas and add only the missing transition. Failures that are not accepted are equally important for interpreting RQ1. If an edit improves an intermediate trace property but fails the benchmark success predicate, it remains a rejected hypothesis. In ALFWorld and TextCraft, the remaining benchmark failures were closed because the residual modes could be written as stable symbolic contracts. In WebShop, some residual modes cannot be closed by another local symbolic rule: search ranking, missing public attributes, and option ambiguity can prevent the executor from seeing enough evidence to make a guaranteed purchase. This is why the final WebShop result improves over baselines but does not reach the same ceiling as ALFWorld and TextCraft. This explains why the largest gains appear on ALFWorld and TextCraft. Both benchmarks have recur-ring symbolic structure: household process schemas in ALFWorld and recipe/inventory dependency closure in TextCraft. Once those schemas are represented as executable policy rules, the executor does not need to re-derive them in context. WebShop is less closed because product retrieval and ranking depend on public snippets and search ordering; this is why the margin over Dual Memory [ 31 ] is smaller there and why the KB-tool language actor can underperform the rendered-prompt actor. The important RQ1 result is therefore not only that the final numbers are higher, but that the strongest policy is the artifact itself rather than a language model interpreting the artifact. 

Why the endpoint reaches 100% on ALFWorld and TextCraft. The endpoint can reach the ceiling when the remaining failure modes are expressible as stable symbolic contracts. ALFWorld has long horizons, but its valid-unseen tasks are built from recurring household schemas: search, pickup, open, place, light use, and process-tool variants. After the accepted rules cover those schemas and their revisit/recovery cases, every task type in the 134-game bank has an executable proof path. 24 TextCraft is even more structure-preserving: once recipes, inventory checks, and prerequisite closure are represented as a dependency policy, each of the 100 evaluation items can be solved by executing the graph. WebShop does not have the same closure property under public text observations, because product retrieval and ranking can hide the decisive evidence. This is why WebShop remains below 

100% even though the KB improves the policy. 

# H Capability Resides in the Executable KB Artifact 

This section expands Section 6.2. It treats the accepted KB as a memory and policy artifact, asking whether the KB stores task knowledge in a form that is useful to an LLM actor, and whether that same knowledge is more reliable when executed directly rather than reinterpreted by an LLM at every step. The cold-start ledger records where this memory comes from: policy knowledge enters the artifact only through verifier-accepted typed edits. The access-control analysis then freezes the completed KB and changes only how the actor accesses that memory. Table 9 reports cold-start evolution using only the minimal ledger fields. In ALFWorld, the accepted rounds add pick/place, light-toggle, and process-tool/revisit repairs; in MetaWorld, one accepted round installs the predicates, skills, and rules for a pick-place family. The access-control rows themselves are already reported in Table 1; here we analyze their failure signatures and add the ALFWorld task-type diagnostic in Table 10. Table 9: Cold-start artifact evolution. Benchmark Artifact Edits Success 

ALFWorld Scaffold 0 0/134 = 0 .0% 

ALFWorld Iter 1 +8 41 /134 = 30 .6% 

ALFWorld Iter 2 +2 59 /134 = 44 .0% 

ALFWorld Iter 3 +3 134 /134 = 100 .0%

MW pick-place Scaffold 0 0/50 = 0 .0% 

MW pick-place Iter 1 +27 50 /50 = 100 .0%

The cold-start ledger establishes acquisition: policy knowledge enters the artifact only through verifier-accepted edits. The table is intentionally coarse: it records when an executable artifact becomes stronger, not every rejected hypothesis considered by the editor. This keeps the acquisition evidence separate from the access-control evidence in the main table, where the same completed artifact is exposed through different interfaces. The ALFWorld row above is the gpt-5.5 rule-level cold-start ledger used for the local-editability analysis. The gpt-4o policy-schema diagnostic in Table 8 uses a different mutation surface: it accepts six add_task_schema edits followed by four add_policy_schema edits, then executes the accepted schemas through the fixed ALFWorld executor. These two ledgers answer different questions. The stronger-editor ledger shows faster from-zero construction through localized symbolic repairs; the weaker-editor ledger shows that the agentic loop still works when the public environment interface makes the policy-schema targets explicit. The access-control rows in Table 1 are designed to separate four mechanisms that are otherwise easy to conflate. The LLM w/o KB row is a step-by-step language actor under the same task protocol. It is therefore closest to the action-selection burden faced by prompt agents such as ReAct [ 33 ]: the model must infer the goal, remember the state, infer preconditions, and choose an admissible action from text alone. Its failures are mostly not single-step language misunderstandings. They are long-horizon control failures: losing the target object after moving through rooms, applying a process action before the object is in the right tool, forgetting an intermediate TextCraft ingredient, or buying a WebShop item that matches a surface keyword but violates a hidden hard constraint. The KB-prompt row asks a different question: if the learned artifact is rendered as natural-language or structured prompt context, can a test-time LLM use it as advice? This improves over no KB because the prompt exposes task schemas, affordances, preconditions, recipe dependencies, and common recovery patterns. In ALFWorld, the LLM can read that heat/cool/clean goals require tool-specific transport and revisit behavior; in TextCraft, it can read recipe dependencies and inventory checks; in WebShop, it can read constraint-tracking and purchase-gating rules. However, prompt access does 25 not make the KB the policy. The LLM still has to bind the rendered rule to the current observation, decide whether the rule applies now, and emit the correct action. The prompt row therefore measures whether the artifact is informative to an LLM, not whether it is fully executed. The KB-tool row tests a more structured interface. Instead of giving the whole artifact as prompt text, the LLM can retrieve typed facts from the accepted KB: object categories and affordances, symbolic preconditions, operator effects, goal schemas, recipe dependencies, monitors, and recovery suggestions. This is why tools are much stronger on ALFWorld and TextCraft. These two domains have compact symbolic state and discrete action grammars, so a retrieved rule often maps almost directly to the next action. For example, retrieving the current ALFWorld process schema tells the actor which object, receptacle, and tool are load-bearing; retrieving the TextCraft dependency graph tells the actor which ingredient is still missing. In this regime, KB tools reduce hallucinated preconditions and shorten the LLM’s search over possible next actions. The tool row is still not the deployed Kintsugi policy. It is an LLM-mediated policy that calls into the KB. This distinction matters for robotics and planning, which are the main target setting for the artifact design. A robot planner cannot treat a rule such as “insert after stable contact” as a vague hint; it needs a state predicate, a precondition, an operator or skill binding, a monitor, and a success/failure condition. Kintsugi’s symbolic executor owns that contract. It evaluates the predicates and policy schemas itself, triggers monitors and recoveries deterministically, and emits an action without asking the LLM to reinterpret the retrieved fact. Thus the executor row tests whether the KB is a policy object, while the prompt/tool rows test whether the same policy object is useful when exposed to a language actor. The WebShop exception shows the boundary of the current tool interface rather than a contradiction of the KB claim. WebShop product selection is a fuzzy ranking problem over public snippets, option strings, prices, and search ordering. The current KB tool returns local symbolic or state facts; it does not own the full retrieval-and-ranking loop, does not see hidden catalog evidence, and can fragment a comparison that is easier for an LLM to perform when the KB is rendered in one prompt. A tool call can also make the actor over-focus on a retrieved constraint while missing a better candidate in the visible product list. This is why KB prompt access can outperform KB tools on WebShop even though both improve over no-KB acting. For embodied planning domains such as ALFWorld, TextCraft, MetaWorld, and RoboSuite-style symbolic control, the useful KB components are local and executable; for WebShop, the missing component is a KB-owned retrieval/ranking policy rather than another local precondition fact. Table 10: ALFWorld access-control breakdown by task type. Type N w/o KB KB prompt KB tools Exec. 

Pick 24 16/24 20/24 24/24 24/24 Light 18 4/18 6/18 18/18 18/18 Clean 31 8/31 17/31 31/31 31/31 Heat 23 5/23 8/23 21/23 23/23 Cool 21 7/21 8/21 21/21 21/21 Two-obj. 17 7/17 9/17 17/17 17/17 

Total 134 47/134 68/134 132/134 134/134 

The task-type breakdown shows where access pattern matters. Rendering the KB as prompt context helps some process tasks but still leaves action choice to the language model. Typed retrieval is much closer to execution, but the model must still compose retrieved facts into an action. Executing the artifact directly removes that interpretation step and solves every held-out task type. The point is not that the retrieved KB is uninformative: the near-perfect LLM w/ KB tools row shows that the artifact contains the needed knowledge. The remaining gap comes from using a language actor to interpret that knowledge instead of letting the symbolic executor run the accepted rules directly. 

Text-agent convergence and case analysis. The access-control rows should be read together with the edit history. The three LLM rows do not create new policy knowledge; they only expose the same frozen KB as no context, rendered prompt context, or typed retrieval. The symbolic row is different: 26 the accepted KB itself is the deployed policy. This is the main reason that the symbolic executor can be stronger than an LLM that has access to the same information. In ALFWorld, the KB changes the policy from a generic text-action loop into a stateful household-task executor. The cold-start scaffold solves 0/134 games because it has observation and action contracts but no task schemas. The first accepted round adds the basic search, pickup, open-if-needed, and place chain, moving the artifact to 41 /134 . The second round adds the light-toggle schema, reaching 59 /134 . The third round adds process-tool and revisit behavior for clean, heat, cool, and related container cases, reaching 134 /134 . A typical successful transformation is a heat task: the policy no longer treats “heat the potato” as one semantic hint, but decomposes it into locating the potato, carrying it to the microwave, opening the microwave, placing the potato inside, activating the microwave, retrieving the object, and checking the goal. The symbolic policy changes because these steps become typed rules and monitors, not prompt text. When the LLM rows fail, the trace usually shows a plausible admissible action chosen at the wrong time, such as searching the wrong container after the correct object-location rule is already available. Thus the residual ALFWorld gap is mostly an interpretation gap between KB knowledge and LLM action choice, not missing executable knowledge in the KB. In TextCraft, the useful KB change is a different kind of symbolic policy rewrite. The accepted artifact turns recipes and inventory observations into a dependency graph over get , craft , and 

inventory actions. A successful case is a target item whose recipe requires several intermediate materials: the executor plans backward from the requested item, checks whether each ingredient is already present, collects only missing materials, and crafts prerequisites before the final item. This directly fixes the dominant LLM failure pattern, where the actor crafts too early, repeats a collection action after the inventory is sufficient, or forgets an intermediate recipe. The 97 /100 KB-tool result shows that the exposed rules are already almost sufficient for a language actor, but the 100 /100 

symbolic result comes from executing the dependency policy rather than reinterpreting it at each step. WebShop is the important counterexample and is therefore reported without smoothing. The KB does improve the task by maintaining query terms, hard constraints, option choices, price/attribute scores, and purchase gating under the 100 Dual Memory-aligned [ 31 ] sessions. A successful WebShop case is one where the symbolic policy keeps the requested attributes separate from soft textual similarity and refuses to buy a product whose visible option or price violates a hard constraint. The remaining failures have a different character from ALFWorld and TextCraft. Public product snippets do not always expose the decisive attribute, search ranking can bury a valid product behind near misses, and the current typed tool returns local KB/state facts rather than owning the full retrieval-and-ranking loop. This explains why rendered KB prompt access can beat the tool interface on WebShop: the prompt gives the language model a single context for fuzzy product comparison, whereas the tool interface can fragment that comparison across calls. In this setting convergence stops when new symbolic edits improve a visible constraint case but do not reliably improve final reward under the public observation interface. We therefore treat the WebShop tool result as evidence about an interface boundary, not as a failure of the KB to contain useful shopping knowledge. 

# I Localized KB Edits Repair Target Behaviors 

This section expands Section 6.3 and Table 2. It asks whether policy behavior can be changed through localized typed KB edits without off-target regression, naming the edit loci and validation structure behind each accepted round. The ALFWorld cold-start ledger gives a controlled case because each accepted edit round targets a named family of rules and predicates, and each commit is checked against behavior that was already solved. The three accepted ALFWorld rounds have different edit loci. The first round repairs the basic pick/place chain: the executor learns how to search for a target object, take it, navigate to the requested receptacle, open the receptacle if needed, and deposit the object. This moves the tar-geted pick/place family from 0/41 to 41 /41 . The second round adds the light-use transition for 

look_at_obj_in_light : once the target is held, the policy must locate a lamp and issue a use 

command rather than deposit the object. This repairs 0/18 to 18 /18 while preserving the already solved pick/place behavior. The third round adds the process-tool chains for clean , heat , and cool ;these repairs add tool navigation, tool-specific process actions, and the revisit behavior needed after 27 processing. The target family moves from 0/75 to 75 /75 , again with no protected regression in the previously solved families. The important point is not only that success increases. Each accepted update has a bounded owner. Missing deposit behavior belongs to policy schemas and openability predicates; missing lamp behavior belongs to the task schema and toggle-use binding; missing clean/heat/cool behavior belongs to process-tool semantics, process predicates, and skill bindings. This is the white-box maintenance claim: a failure trace does not become a generic training example, but a localized edit hypothesis with a focused validation set and a protected regression set. 

Interactive white-box repair loop. The RQ3 experiment is interactive in the sense that each round exposes the current symbolic failure before changing the policy. A rollout stores the observation, parsed state, active goal schema, predicates that evaluated true or false, the selected rule, the emitted action, and the environment response. When a trajectory fails, the analysis step does not ask for an unconstrained new policy. It asks which symbolic contract was missing or wrong. The answer is then represented as a typed KBDiff against a named layer: grounding, predicate, ontology/affordance, operator effect, policy schema, monitor, recovery, or goal template. The edit is applied to the KB, loaded by the same executor, and checked by smoke tests, a focused validation bank for the target failure, and a protected regression bank for behavior already solved. This is why we call the RQ3 evidence white-box rather than just iterative prompt improvement. The object being changed is visible: a rule, predicate, operator, or schema in the KB. The reason for the change is also visible: the trace shows which predicate was missing, which precondition blocked an operator, or which rule fired too early. After the edit commits, the symbolic executor’s behavior changes deterministically because its rule set has changed; there is no hidden parameter update and no test-time prompt memory that must be reinterpreted by an LLM. 

What changes in the symbolic policy. The first ALFWorld round turns the scaffold into a basic object-transfer policy. Before the edit, the executor can read observations and issue actions, but it does not own a complete schema for finding an object and depositing it at a goal receptacle. The accepted KBDiff adds search/pick/place policy rules, open-if-needed behavior, and the predicates needed to distinguish held object, current receptacle, openable receptacle, and completed placement. Symbolically, the policy changes from a fallback action loop into a schema with subgoals: find target, acquire target, navigate to goal receptacle, satisfy receptacle preconditions, and deposit. This is why the pick/place family moves from 0/41 to 41 /41 .The second round is a smaller but cleaner locality test. The already accepted pick/place rules are not rewritten. The failure trace for look_at_obj_in_light shows that holding the target object is not enough: the goal requires a lamp interaction rather than a receptacle deposit. The accepted edit adds a light-use schema and a toggle/use binding. The symbolic executor now recognizes a lamp as the relevant tool object, navigates to it, and emits use at the correct phase. Because the edit is scoped to the light goal schema, the earlier pick/place bank remains protected and does not regress. The third round adds the process-tool layer needed for clean, heat, and cool tasks. Here the KB changes are more structural: the goal parser maps the task to a process type, ontology entries bind process types to tools such as sink, microwave, and fridge, policy schemas add transport-into-tool and retrieve- after-process phases, and monitors check whether the object must be revisited after the tool action. This changes the executor from a pure object-transfer policy into a process-aware household policy. The repair succeeds because the same symbolic pattern covers many surface goals while still using specific tool bindings and preconditions for each process. 

Why rejected edits matter. Several plausible edits are not accepted because they are not local enough. A broad rule such as always opening containers can help closed-receptacle failures but can waste steps or issue invalid actions on non-openable targets. A generic process fallback can appear to make progress on heat/cool/clean traces while failing to retrieve the processed object or breaking already solved pick/place tasks. A rule that fires whenever an object is held can interfere with light tasks and two-object tasks. These candidates remain useful diagnostics, but they do not become policy. The verifier requires the target failure family to improve and the protected family to stay fixed; otherwise the KBDiff is rejected and the deployed KB is unchanged. 28 Table 11: Accepted-edit ledger summary. Run Initial Edits Final 

ALFWorld cold-start 0/134 13 134/134 MW pick-place 0/50 27 50/50 Pred. cover Scaffold 1 500/500 Pred. blocks Scaffold 1 500/500 Pred. painting Scaffold 1 500/500 Pred. pybullet-cover Scaffold 1 497/500 

Why this leads to success rather than drift. The successful trajectory is cumulative because each accepted edit tightens a specific symbolic contract. Round 1 installs object transfer. Round 2 adds a separate light-use branch. Round 3 adds process-tool branches and revisit behavior. Later rules do not replace earlier rules; they add missing branches or preconditions under named goal schemas. This prevents the common failure of interactive prompt repair, where a new natural-language instruction improves one case but changes the model’s behavior elsewhere. In Kintsugi, the edit target, rule priority, trigger predicate, and validation bank are explicit, so success comes from accumulating verified local repairs rather than from implicitly steering an LLM with a longer prompt. 

Example repair. One early ALFWorld failure mode occurs after the agent has found and picked up the target object and navigated to the goal receptacle. The trace shows that the current receptacle is an openable container, the target is held, and the episode is ready for deposit, but the container is still closed. A prompt-only agent might record this as a verbal reminder such as “remember to open containers.” Kintsugi instead localizes the repair to the policy-schema and predicate interface: the missing condition is current_openable_closed , and the missing action is an OPEN step before 

PUT . The accepted repair is the OpenGoalRecep rule described above. Its focused validation set contains closed-container deposit cases, while the protected set contains the already solved open-container and non-openable receptacle cases. The repair commits only if the former improves and the latter does not regress. Rejected hypotheses remain in the audit log and are not counted as policy updates. The final column reports only verifier-accepted artifacts. This distinction is important for the editability claim: a generated hypothesis is not a policy update until it has passed typed application, focused validation, and protected regression. The ledger therefore records both the small number of committed updates and the fact that failed hypotheses remain auditable rather than silently changing the deployed policy. 

# J KB-Driven Policies Extend to Object-Centric Manipulation 

Table 12: Reuse and boundary evidence. Setting Result 

MT-50 train 2466/2500 = 98.6% MT-50 held-out 2458/2500 = 98.3% Predicators 1997/2000 = 99.85% RoboSuite single-arm 68/75 = 90.7% This section expands Section 6.4. It tests whether the same KB-driven symbolic-policy interface extends beyond text-agent environ-ments when the substrate exposes object-centric state and calibrated action or skill bind-ings, separating mature object-centric reuse from transitional RoboSuite boundary evi-dence. The rows in Table 12 deliberately mix different evidentiary regimes, so the interpre-tation belongs in prose rather than inside the table. MetaWorld and Predicators evaluate mature object-centric KBs, and RoboSuite is a transitional single-arm boundary study rather than a full visual robot-learning claim. The MetaWorld train and held-out rows differ only slightly, suggesting that the KB is not merely memorizing reset seeds. The Predicators row tests the same symbolic-policy idea in external TAMP-style domains. The RoboSuite row is stricter than symbolic plan validity because success is measured under true policy-action rollouts, but it uses simulator state and is therefore reported as boundary evidence. 29 Object-centric convergence summary. Across the non-text experiments, the symbolic policy changes in the same broad way: it stops acting as a flat collection of task names and starts acting as an object-centric controller over roles, relations, phase predicates, monitors, and skill bindings. In MetaWorld, this means the same KB can reuse object roles and contact/support relations across all 50 tasks while swapping in task-specific phase schemas. In Predicators, it means goal atoms are rewritten into explicit symbolic preconditions such as which block must be covered, which table height makes an OnTable fact true, or why a painted object must be washed and dried before being boxed. In RoboSuite, it means rollout failures are localized to the boundary between a symbolic intent and a continuous skill: yaw-aware transport, nut-contact insertion, scene-conditioned ordering, and recovery monitors become explicit policy knowledge only after they improve focused validation without breaking protected checks. The remaining failures are therefore not all the same kind of miss. MetaWorld residuals mostly reflect precision and contact-timing families, where another high-level symbolic rule is not accepted unless it improves those difficult episodes without weakening the many already-solved tasks. Predicators has only three misses, all in the embodied pybullet_cover setting; the abstract cover domain is solved by the same task-level KB, so these misses are treated as IK/controller variance rather than absent cover knowledge. RoboSuite is stricter still: tool_hang , the remaining nut_assembly seed, and the door miss require contact-preserving insertion, orientation channels, and validated low-level recovery monitors. These are precisely the cases where the loop can diagnose progress but cannot safely accept a policy update until the continuous interface exposes a reliable contract. Table 13 expands the RoboSuite row used in Table 3. The quantitative claim uses the 15 compatible single-arm tasks with five reset seeds each. Table 13: RoboSuite single-arm breakdown. Task Success 

Aggregate 68/75 = 90.7% door 4/5 lift 5/5 nut_assembly 4/5 nut_assembly_round 5/5 nut_assembly_single 5/5 nut_assembly_square 5/5 pickplace_bread 5/5 pickplace_can 5/5 pickplace_cereal 5/5 pickplace_milk 5/5 pickplace_multi 5/5 pickplace_single 5/5 stack 5/5 tool_hang 0/5 wipe 5/5 

Why the remaining single-arm failures persist. The 68 /75 RoboSuite result should not be read as an iteration that simply stopped before trying enough patches. The agentic loop generated both accepted and rejected hypotheses, and the verifier admitted a candidate only when it improved the focused window without violating the environment success predicate or protected regression checks. Several rejected edits improved an intermediate residual, added extra recovery actions, or solved one seed while breaking another. These rejected hypotheses are useful evidence: they show where the symbolic policy is already choosing the right high-level intent, but the grounding, recovery, or skill-interface contract below that intent is still under-specified. The clearest remaining case is tool_hang , the only single-arm task in this aggregate that remains at 0/5. Bootstrap and frame-grip probes could move the frame and improve intermediate rela-tions such as frame_tip_close_to_base , but they did not make frame_rod_between_walls or 

tool_on_frame true. Some waypoint variants improved the apparent insertion geometry, while 30 other variants pushed the frame back out of the insertion window. Because these edits failed the final environment success predicate, the verifier recorded them as progress evidence rather than solved policy knowledge. The failure is therefore not well explained as missing high-level task order. The missing contract is a real frame-pivot / stand-wall insertion and hook-placement schema, with explicit contact-preserving translation, orientation channels, and success monitors. The loop can say what is missing, but it cannot safely commit a KB rule until the action interface exposes a repeatable way to keep the frame inside the narrow contact window while placing the tool. The remaining nut_assembly failures have a different structure. Accepted edits already repair several subcases: RoundNut contact, SquareNut handle-first grounding, and scene-conditioned multi-nut ordering. Some focused windows reached 5/5, while an older strict regression window stayed at 

4/5. The rejected candidates are informative here as well. Tighter contact windows, blind subgoal resets, generic settling, and low-level transport recoveries either did not improve the paired strict window, slowed successful trajectories, or solved one seed while breaking another. This points to a contact/insertion and scene-conditioned sequencing boundary. The next safe edit is not a looser success threshold, but a stronger KB-owned verification contract for when a nut is actually controlled, aligned, inserted, and safe to advance past. The door residual is smaller but less cleanly localized. The remaining failure is consistent with handle/contact recovery sensitivity, and a default-promotion candidate was not consistently better in spot checks. Since the evidence did not show a focused target improvement with protected non-regression, the loop did not accept a global policy variant. We therefore leave this as an under-localized recovery/contact case rather than claiming it is solved by high-level planning. More generally, the RoboSuite failures show why recovery rules are not accepted merely because they fire. Some monitors and recoveries helped earlier transport and stack windows, but later low-level retries could add actions, mask the real failure owner, or improve residual health while the environment success predicate remained false. In Kintsugi, such candidates remain rejected hypotheses until they can be expressed as KB-owned monitors with explicit trigger conditions, repair targets, and regression evidence. The same boundary appears in the more complex RoboCasa-style diagnostic runs, which we do not include as a headline quantitative claim. The standing OpenDoor/SingleCabinet scout plateaued at 

0–2/20 after 38 edit attempts because the dominant failure was no longer which symbolic subgoal to pursue; it was the motor interface’s ability to realize a narrow manipulation effect under the available controller settings. In that case, edits could identify the desired open-door relation and propose handle/contact recoveries, but performance remained capped by controller gain, output limit, and OSC servo bandwidth. This is a useful negative case for the method: once the bottleneck is a motor ceiling rather than a missing symbolic contract, additional KB edits should not be counted as learned policy unless they pass the same environment success and non-regression gates. Table 14: MetaWorld MT-50 non-ceiling tasks. Task Train Held-out 

basketball-v3 49/50 49/50 button-press-wall-v3 43/50 46/50 disassemble-v3 48/50 45/50 door-lock-v3 50/50 49/50 faucet-close-v3 50/50 49/50 peg-insert-side-v3 49/50 47/50 peg-unplug-side-v3 48/50 50/50 pick-place-v3 50/50 49/50 pick-place-wall-v3 49/50 50/50 push-back-v3 45/50 43/50 soccer-v3 43/50 45/50 stick-pull-v3 49/50 46/50 sweep-into-v3 43/50 40/50 For MetaWorld, the small train-to-held-out drop suggests that most of the learned structure is not memorizing re-set seeds. The remaining failures con-centrate in task families that require pre-cise phase transitions or contact timing, which is consistent with the method’s boundary: Kintsugi can select and re-pair symbolic schemas, but the continu-ous substrate must still provide reliable primitive execution. Table 14 lists only the non-ceiling tasks; omitted MT-50 tasks are solved at 50 /50 in the corre-sponding split. The train split has 40/50 ceiling tasks and 2466/2500 successes; the held-out split has 39/50 ceiling tasks and 2458/2500 successes. 

Predicators / predictor-style details. 

The Predicators evaluation uses four 31 task families with 10 test seeds and 50 tasks per family per seed. The suite result is 1997 /2000 = 99 .85% , with all residual misses isolated to the embodied PyBullet cover setting. The cover domain is solved at 500 /500 after the KB grounds the goal block from the goal atom and uses cover-specific placement relations. The same abstract cover rule transfers to pybullet_cover , which reaches 

497 /500 under robot-specific bindings; because the abstract setting is already solved, these residual misses are better explained by Panda IK/controller variance than by a missing symbolic rule. The 

blocks domain reaches 500 /500 after the policy owns table-height support facts, goal-forest de-composition, y-axis table-clear tests, and strict clearance margins. The painting domain reaches 

500 /500 after the KB makes three hidden process constraints explicit: receptacle-specific grasping, washing before drying, and opening the box lid before placement. These cases show the same policy shift as in the text domains: once the missing condition is represented as an executable symbolic contract, the executor no longer has to rediscover it through search or prompt reasoning. For RoboSuite, the result should be read as object-centric failure-localization evidence rather than a full visual manipulation benchmark. The experiments use simulator state, and some dynamic grounding and low-level execution still live in task-local adapters. The useful signal is that failures can be localized into grounding, operator, policy-schema, monitor, recovery, and planning layers, and accepted patches can be distilled into the central KB. 

RoboSuite protocol fidelity. The RoboSuite rows follow the same fixed-artifact evaluation contract as the rest of the paper, but with an explicitly narrower substrate. Each protocol round records the active KB, rollout bank, annotated trace, frontier analysis, proposal, and status summary. The recorded protocol status marks the setting as transitional : S0 is object-centric RoboSuite simulator state, L0 grounding is partly executed by task-local Python grounders, the runtime brain is none ,and the action owner is the symbolic executor. Learned policy knowledge is counted only when it is represented as a KB-owned or typed schema update and then checked by focused validation plus regression. Python adapters are treated as execution plumbing or candidate prototypes, not as standalone learned policy. Fixed seed windows are used only for paired before/after localization; broader family or fresh-seed windows are used to check regression. 

Evidence for the RoboSuite boundary. The available evidence does not support the stronger claim that every remaining RoboSuite drop has a single cause. It supports a narrower and more useful claim: many drops are not explained by missing high-level task intent alone. The traces and accepted/rejected edits localize them to the symbolic-to-continuous execution boundary: object/contact grounding, scene-conditioned sequencing, monitors and recoveries, and skill/action bindings. The evidence is strongest when a focused before/after window improves and a protected regression window does not degrade; diagnostic rows are used only to localize the remaining boundary, not to claim solved behavior. For tall-box transport, the accepted box_transport_yaw_grounding_v1 edit changes the Cereal window from 3/5 to 5/5, while the PickPlace-family regression reaches 29 /30 . This localizes the original failure to grounding and policy-schema binding for yaw-aware side grasping rather than to a generic retry rule. For nut tasks, the accepted edits form a more layered chain. round_contact_v1 moves RoundNut from 0/5 to 5/5; contact_v2_general keeps RoundNut at 5/5 and moves SquareNut from 3/5 to 

5/5. Under strict environment success, square_handle_first_approach_v1 moves NutAssem-bly from 2/5 to 4/5 with a 19 /20 nut-family regression check. These edits support a contact-frame, handle-grounding, and insertion-schema interpretation. Center targeting and looser contact windows were not accepted when they worsened focused or multi-nut validation. For multi-nut composition, the evidence shifts from primitive execution to planning-schema structure. The multi_nut_insert ordering principle improves one NutAssembly window from 0/5 to 3/5.Later scene-conditioned ordering reaches 5/5 on seeds 367247–367251 while preserving the older 

4/5 regression window. A fixed SquareNut-first order solves one seed but breaks another, which is why the accepted repair is a scene-conditioned subgoal-ordering contract rather than another primitive threshold. Recovery evidence is mixed in a useful way. Early transport iterations add payload_lost , release-event latching, and Stack soft-lift recovery, moving the transport aggregate to 64 /70 . Later recovery candidates are rejected when they only fire without improving final success, slow a successful 32 trajectory, or add a loop that is superseded by a shorter higher-level adaptive schema. This is why we treat recovery as load-bearing but require KB-owned monitor contracts with validation gates. Finally, tool_hang remains diagnostic rather than solved evidence. Frame-grip and wall-insert probes improve intermediate relations such as frame_tip_close_to_base and sometimes place 

frame_tip_to_base near the insertion window, but environment success remains false and 

frame_rod_between_walls remains false. The boundary is not only task order; it is the missing frame-pivot / stand-wall insertion schema with contact-preserving translation, orientation channels, and explicit success monitors. 

# K Typed KB Layers Are Load-Bearing Contracts 

This section expands Section 6.5. It asks whether the S0/L 0–L7 structure is only descriptive or whether it defines load-bearing execution contracts, making the frozen-artifact intervention contract explicit. The intervention is performed on the frozen accepted ALFWorld KB with no retraining and no test-time LLM calls. Because different layers define different contracts, the diagnostic signal may appear in execution, KB-query checks, planning, or a targeted probe rather than in the same scalar metric for every row. In particular, the planning readout measures task-schema and decomposition coverage; it is not identical to full environment-valid execution. Table 15: RQ5 layer-wise KB ablation on ALFWorld. Contract Intervention Exec. Query Plan 

Full KB No removal 120/120 2787/2787 255/255 

S0 Source Cut off the goal/source record 0/120 – –L0 Grounding Disable observation-to-state updates 0/120 – –L1 Predicates Set all non-always predicates to false 0/120 – –L2 Ontology Remove ontology, affordances, categories, and spatial priors 0/120 2232/2787 255/255 L3 Operators Remove symbolic operators and effects 120/120 2787/2787 255/255 L4 Policy Remove policy rules except the 

LOOK fallback 0/120 2787/2787 255/255 L5 Recovery Disable invalid-command recovery 120/120 2787/2787 255/255 L6 Experience Compare cold-start scaffold with accepted KB – – –L7 Goals Remove task schemas and goal templates 40/120 2130/2787 0/255 Table 16: Intra-layer ALFWorld subcomponent abla-tion. Variant Execute Query Plan 

Full KB 48/48 2787/2787 255/255 

−spatial priors 48/48 2532/2787 255/255 Simple schema only 24/48 2160/2787 30/255 

−round-robin rule 46/48 2787/2787 255/255 

−affordances 23/48 2487/2787 255/255 Table 15 supports RQ5 by showing layer-specific failure signatures rather than uni-form degradation. S0/L0/L1 form the ex-ecution interface from source to grounded state to named predicates. L2 provides world semantics and action applicability. L4 controls action selection. L7 controls goal templates and task decomposition. L3, L5, and L6 are not fully diagnosed by clean rollout success alone, so their roles are measured through targeted probes for causal effects, recovery behavior, and learning provenance: removing L3 effects keeps nominal execution at 120 /120 in this runner but drops the action-effect probe from 11 /11 to 0/11 ; disabling L5 recovery keeps clean rollouts intact but drops the invalid-command stress probe from 1/1 to 0/1;and L6 is measured by the cold-start ledger moving from 0/134 to 134 /134 through accepted edit rounds. 33 The subcomponent ablations in Table 16 refine the layer-wise RQ5 result but are not the primary evidence for the typed-layer design. Removing affordances damages execution because the executor loses action-applicability constraints, while removing spatial priors is less harmful on this particular ALFWorld diagnostic suite. Removing the round-robin rule causes a smaller selective execution drop. The simple-schema variant compresses multiple policy and task-schema structures, reducing both execution and planning. These patterns are consistent with the broader S0/L0–L7 intervention study. 

# L Limitations and Future Work 

Limitations. Kintsugi is a white-box task-knowledge layer, not an end-to-end robot-learning system. The strongest results assume that S0 already exposes a reliable state interface: TextWorld-style observations and admissible actions for ALFWorld, public text observations for WebShop, recipe/inventory state for TextCraft, simulator state for RoboSuite, and object-centric state for MetaWorld and Predicators. This is the right abstraction for testing whether typed policy knowledge can be learned, edited, verified, and executed, but it does not solve perception. When an object is misdetected, a relation is estimated incorrectly, or a visual tracker loses an object, the current experiments assume that this error has already been handled below S0.The second limitation is the skill and controller boundary. The KB can choose a symbolic subgoal, bind a skill, and monitor whether the intended relation becomes true, but it does not learn arbitrary low-level motor control from scratch. This is why RoboSuite is reported as boundary evidence and why tool_hang remains unresolved in the single-arm aggregate. The symbolic policy can identify that frame insertion and hook placement require contact-preserving motion and orientation control, but the current action interface does not provide a verified primitive that keeps the frame inside the narrow insertion window while placing the tool. The RoboCasa-style OpenDoor/SingleCabinet diagnostic shows the same limitation more sharply: after many edit attempts, the bottleneck is controller gain, output range, and OSC servo bandwidth rather than another missing high-level symbolic rule. The third limitation is verifier coverage. A typed edit is only as safe as the focused and protected banks used to accept it. The verifier prevents many obvious forms of drift, but it cannot certify behavior outside the covered state distribution. This is especially important for WebShop and robot manipulation. In WebShop, public snippets and search ranking can hide the decisive product evidence, so a local symbolic constraint rule may improve one window while failing another. In manipulation, a recovery rule can improve an intermediate residual while still failing the task success predicate or slowing a previously successful trajectory. Finally, Kintsugi’s current evidence is about task-level policy knowledge, not about learning the entire robot stack. The framework assumes a substrate that can expose objects, relations, actions, or calibrated skills with enough stability for symbolic contracts to be meaningful. This is a deliberate scope choice: it isolates whether task knowledge can be stored as an editable, verifier-gated artifact. It also defines the next research problem. 

Broader impacts. The intended positive impact is more maintainable embodied-agent behavior: policy knowledge is inspectable, edits are local, and deployed action selection does not require a test-time LLM. This can reduce opaque prompt drift and make failure analysis easier for safety reviews, debugging, and reproducibility. The corresponding risk is over-trusting an executable artifact outside its verified state, skill, or perception contract. A KB that is correct in a simulator or text environment may become unsafe if deployed with an unreliable vision system, an uncalibrated controller, or an incomplete protected regression bank. Responsible use therefore requires benchmark-scoped claims, human review before real-world deployment, explicit S0 and skill-interface contracts, verifier-gated updates, and regression banks that match the intended deployment distribution. 

Future work: replacing oracle S0 with vision. The central next step is to replace oracle or simulator object-centric S0 with a vision-derived state interface while preserving the same KB and verification discipline. The goal is not to discard the symbolic artifact, but to make S0 a learned perception and state-estimation contract. A visual S0 should provide object slots or tracks, categories, poses, attributes, relations, uncertainty, and temporal persistence. The existing L0 grounding layer would then map these perceptual entities into KB predicates such as held , open , inside , near ,

aligned , or task-specific contact relations. 34 This vision extension should be staged rather than treated as a single end-to-end black box. First, train or plug in a perception module that produces object-centric state with calibrated uncertainty. Second, add grounding checks that compare visual predicates against environment or human-labeled evidence, so failures can be localized to perception, grounding, symbolic policy, or skill execution. Third, let Kintsugi edit L0–L7 while keeping S0 versioned: if a failure is caused by missed detection or relation estimation, the system should update the visual grounding contract or request additional perceptual supervision rather than incorrectly adding a policy rule. Fourth, extend the verifier to include visual regression banks, so a new grounding rule or detector threshold must improve the target visual failure without breaking previous object/relation recognition. The longer-term direction is an end-to-end embodied system in which perception, state estimation, symbolic task knowledge, and skills are all trainable but remain modularly inspectable. The policy should still execute through an artifact: visual S0 produces uncertain object-centric state, L0 grounds that state into predicates, L1–L7 select and monitor symbolic actions, and the skill layer executes calibrated motor commands. The LLM can remain a proposal engine for edits and diagnostics, but deployed action selection should continue to be owned by the executable artifact. This preserves the main benefit of Kintsugi while moving from oracle object-centric representations to vision-based, end-to-end embodied learning. 35