Title: GRAIL: A Deep-Granularity Hybrid Resonance Framework for Real-Time Agent Discovery via SLM-Enhanced Indexing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02489v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:55:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# GRAIL: A Deep-Granularity Hybrid Resonance Framework for Real-Time Agent Discovery via SLM-Enhanced Indexing 

Jinliang Xu ∗

China Academy of Information and Communications Technology , Beijing, China xujinliang@caict.ac.cn 

Abstract —As the ecosystem of Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents expands rapidly, efficient and accurate Agent Discovery becomes a critical bottleneck for large-scale multi-agent collaboration. Existing approaches typically face a di-chotomy: either relying on heavy-weight LLMs for intent parsing, leading to prohibitive latency (often exceeding 30 seconds), or using monolithic vector retrieval that sacrifices semantic precision for speed. To bridge this gap, we propose GRAIL (Granular Resonance-based Agent/AI Link), a novel framework achieving sub-400ms discovery latency without compromising accuracy. GRAIL introduces three key innovations: (1) SLM-Enhanced Prediction, replacing the generalized LLM parser with a specialized, fine-tuned Small Language Model (SLM) for millisecond-level capability tag prediction; (2) Pseudo-Document Expansion, augmenting agent descriptions with synthetic queries to enhance semantic density for robust dense retrieval; and (3) MaxSim Resonance, a fine-grained matching mechanism computing maximum similarity between user queries and discrete agent usage examples, effectively mitigating semantic dilution. Validated on AgentTaxo-9K, our new large-scale dataset of 9,240 agents, GRAIL reduces end-to-end discovery latency by over 79 × compared to LLM-parsing baselines, while significantly outperforming traditional vector search in Recall@10. This framework offers a scalable, industrial-grade solution for the real-time “Internet of Agents.” 

Index Terms —Multi-Agent Systems, Agent Discovery, Small Language Models, Hybrid Retrieval, Neural Search. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catalyzed a paradigm shift from isolated conversational bots to interconnected Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) [1], [2]. As envi-sioned in the concept of the “Internet of Agents”, thousands of specialized agents—ranging from coding assistants to financial analysts [3], [4]—are being deployed to collaboratively solve complex tasks. In this ecosystem, Agent Discovery , the process of accurately matching a user’s natural language intent to the most capable agent among a massive candidate pool, has emerged as a critical infrastructure challenge [5], [6]. Despite the proliferation of agent protocols [7], achieving real-time, high-precision agent discovery remains an unsolved problem. Existing approaches predominantly fall into two categories, each with significant limitations: 

1. LLM-Centric Parsing (High Latency): Some frame-works rely on general-purpose LLMs (e.g., Gemini 3, DeepSeek) to parse user intent and generate structured queries (e.g., SQL or filtered JSON) before searching the database. While highly accurate in understanding complex intent, this “Think-then-Lookup” paradigm incurs prohibitive latency [8]. Our empirical analysis shows that the LLM parsing stage alone often consumes over 30 seconds per query, rendering it unsuitable for real-time interaction or high-frequency agent-to-agent negotiation. 

2. Monolithic Dense Retrieval (Low Precision): Alter-natively, lightweight approaches utilize vector databases to perform dense retrieval on agent descriptions. While efficient (achieving millisecond-level response), these methods typi-cally compress an agent’s diverse capabilities (descriptions, tags, and usage examples) into a single embedding vector. This “coarse-grained” compression leads to semantic drift, where subtle user constraints (e.g., specific API version or pricing model) are lost, resulting in the retrieval of irrelevant agents. Proposed: DGHR Framework        

> Traditional 2: Monolithic Vector
> Traditional 1: LLM-Centric
> Our Approach SLM Predictor
> (Fast Parsing)
> Hybrid / MaxSim
> (Fine-grained Resonance)
> Outcome: Fast / Precise
> (High Recall)
> Single Vector Encoder
> (Coarse-grained) Approx. NN Search Outcome: Low Precision
> (Semantic Drift)
> Large LLM Parsing
> (High Latency >4s) Structured Search Outcome: Too Slow
> (Prohibitive Latency)
> User Query
> 2026/2/13 17:14 comparison.svg
> file:///C:/Users/jlxuf/Desktop/comparison.svg 1/1

Fig. 1: Comparison of Agent Discovery Paradigms. LLM-Centric Parsing suffers from high latency ( > 4s) due to heavy inference. Monolithic Vector Retrieval sacrifices seman-tic precision for speed, leading to low recall. Our proposed 

GRAIL Framework leverages a specialized SLM predictor and fine-grained MaxSim resonance to achieve sub-400ms latency without compromising accuracy. To bridge this gap between the precision of LLM reasoning and the speed of vector search, we propose GRAIL (Granular Resonance-based Agent/AI Link), a framework designed for real-time (sub-400ms) discovery of agents at scale. As shown in Fig. 1, unlike previous methods that treat agent metadata as a monolithic text block, GRAIL decouples the discovery process into three granular dimensions: Tags , Context , and 

Intent . Instead of relying on heavy-weight LLMs for online parsing, GRAIL employs a fine-tuned Small Language Model (SLM, 3B parameters) to predict capability tags in mil-

> arXiv:2605.02489v1 [cs.AI] 4 May 2026

liseconds, enabling rapid candidate filtering. Furthermore, we introduce a MaxSim Resonance mechanism that computes the interaction between the user query and discrete agent usage examples (shots), ensuring precise intent matching without the computational cost of full-text cross-encoders. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose GRAIL (Deep-Granularity Hybrid Reso-nance), a novel framework that fundamentally addresses the critical conflict between latency and precision in large-scale agent discovery. A key innovation within GRAIL is the SLM-Enhanced Predictor , which replaces high-latency LLM parsing, achieving sub-400ms end-to-end discovery latency (over 79 × reduction compared to LLM-centric baselines).  

> •

We introduce a novel Deep-Granularity Hybrid Index-ing Strategy that combines SLM-predicted sparse tags with Pseudo-Document expanded dense vectors, effec-tively bridging the semantic gap and enhancing retrieval robustness.  

> •

We develop the MaxSim Resonance Algorithm , a fine-grained matching mechanism that explicitly leverages dis-crete agent usage examples. This method effectively mit-igates the Semantic Dilution Problem inherent in mono-lithic embeddings, significantly boosting intent matching accuracy.  

> •

We establish AgentTaxo-9K , a novel large-scale bench-mark dataset of 9, 240 agents’ metadata and 27 , 720 

queries from users, and through extensive experiments on it, demonstrate that GRAIL achieves sub-400ms discov-ery latency while significantly outperforming state-of-the-art baselines in Recall@10 and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR). II. R ELATED WORK 

Our work sits at the intersection of agent interconnection protocols, efficient neural routing, and fine-grained informa-tion retrieval. In this section, we review the existing landscape and position GRAIL as a complementary indexing layer for the emerging “Internet of Agents” [9]. 

A. Agent Interconnection Protocols & Discovery Standards 

The infrastructure for the Internet of Agents is being shaped by a series of emerging communication protocols that stan-dardize agent identity and capability description [10], [11]. 

1. Agent Card-Based Protocols (e.g., Google A2A): Re-cent industry initiatives, such as the Google A2A (Agent-to-Agent) protocol, utilize Agent Cards as standardized manifests to encapsulate agent identities, capabilities, and endpoints [12], [13]. While Agent Cards provide a unified metadata schema for interoperability, existing implementations often rely on static registries or direct handshakes, lacking a high-performance engine for fuzzy semantic discovery [14]. 

2. Model Context Protocol (MCP): Anthropic’s Model Context Protocol (MCP) standardizes the connection between LLMs and external tools, functioning as a “USB-C for AI” [15]. However, MCP primarily addresses tool binding within a host’s context window. As the number of tools grows, static context injection becomes infeasible, necessitating active discovery mechanisms like “MCP-Zero” [16]. 

3. Network-Layer Discovery (e.g., ANP): The Agent Network Protocol (ANP) and similar directory services (e.g., Cisco ADS) address decentralized agent reachability using Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs) or DNS-SD variants [17], [18]. These network-centric approaches excel at routing by ID but struggle with complex, natural language intent matching. GRAIL complements these protocols by serving as a dynamic, semantic indexing engine that operates on top of standardized metadata (e.g., Agent Cards or MCP manifests). 

B. Efficient Routing via Small Language Models 

The paradigm of “LLM-as-a-Router” has evolved from using giant models to specialized Small Language Models (SLMs). 1) LLM Tool Learning: Pioneering works such as 

Gorilla [19] and ToolLLM [20] have demonstrated that Large Language Models can be fine-tuned to master thousands of APIs. However, relying on general-purpose LLMs (e.g., Gemini 3) for intent routing introduces significant latency (often > 30 s), creating a bottleneck for real-time agent interaction [21], [22]. 2) SLM and Knowledge Distillation: To address the latency challenge, recent research advocates for the use of SLMs (parameters < 1B) as efficient neural routers [22]. Through Knowledge Distillation , capabilities from larger teacher models are transferred to SLMs, enabling them to perform specific intent classification tasks with comparable accuracy but at a fraction of the inference cost (e.g., < 400 ms) [21]. GRAIL adopts this strategy, utilizing a fine-tuned SLM for rapid tag prediction to filter candidates before expensive retrieval operations. 

C. Neural Retrieval & Fine-Grained Late Interaction 

Retrieving the correct agent from a massive pool requires overcoming the “semantic dilution” problem inherent in tradi-tional dense retrieval. 1. Limitations of Monolithic Embed-dings: Standard bi-encoder architectures (e.g., DPR) compress an entire document into a single vector [23], [24]. In the context of multi-functional agents, this compression leads to 

context dilution , where specific capabilities are averaged out, making precise matching difficult [25]. 2. Late Interaction (MaxSim): To preserve fine-grained semantic signals, Col-BERT introduced the concept of Late Interaction , which com-putes the maximum similarity (MaxSim) between query tokens and document tokens [26]. Recent optimizations like PLAID 

have proven the viability of this approach in low-latency set-tings [27]. GRAIL adapts the MaxSim operator from the token level to the “example level,” computing resonance between user queries and discrete agent usage examples. 3. Pseudo-Document Expansion (PDE): To bridge the vocabulary mis-match between user queries and technical agent descriptions, generative query expansion methods (e.g., Doc2Query ) have been widely adopted [28]. GRAIL integrates PDE to augment agent metadata, enhancing the semantic density of the context index. III. T HE GRAIL F RAMEWORK 

In this section, we present the GRAIL framework. We first formulate the agent discovery problem, then detail the offline construction of our tri-dimensional index, and finally describe the online SLM-driven retrieval and MaxSim re-ranking process. Fig. 2 illustrates the overall architecture. The system operates in two distinct phases: (1) Offline Deep-Granularity Indexing: Agent metadata is processed into three independent indices—Sparse (Tags), Context (Pseudo-Doc Augmented Vectors), and Intent (Fine-Grained Example Matrices). (2) Online SLM-Driven Discovery: A lightweight SLM predictor ( 3B params) accelerates intent parsing ( <

50 ms ), driving a hybrid recall mechanism followed by the MaxSim Resonance re-ranking algorithm to ensure precise intent matching. Phase II: SLM-Driven Discovery   

> Phase I: Deep-Granularity Indexing
> Structured Indices
> Extract Embed Matrix
> Tags & Query Vec
> Candidates
> User Query
> SLM Predictor
> (Intent Parsing < 30ms)
> Hybrid Recall
> (Sparse Filter + Dense Search)
> MaxSim Resonance
> (Fine-Grained Re-ranking)
> Ranked Agents
> Agent Metadata
> (Raw Input)
> Multi-Grain Indexing Engine
> (LLM Expansion + Matrix Encoding)
> Sparse Index
> (Tags)
> Context Index
> (Pseudo-Docs)
> Intent Index
> (Example Matrices)

Fig. 2: The Overall Architecture of the GRAIL Framework. 

A. Problem Formulation 

To illustrate the structure of agents within our framework, consider the following example of an agent’s metadata (in-cluding Description , Tags and Examples ), represented in JSON format: 

{"Name": "HR-Core Automator", "Description": "This agent is an expert in optimizing Human Resources workflows within Human Capital Management systems like ...", "Tags": ["Security", "Technology", "HR", "HCM", "Workday", ... ], "Examples": ["Draft an API call to Workday to init the onboarding workflow ...", "Analyze the attached employee ..." ]}

Let A = {a1, a 2, . . . , a N } denote a repository of N agents. Each agent ai is defined by a tuple of structured metadata: 

ai = ⟨T i, Di, Ei⟩, where:  

> •

Ti is a set of discrete capability tags ( Tags ), encompassing core domain areas and primary capabilities, alongside both high-frequency and low-frequency yet representative unique tags specific to the agent’s functionalities.  

> •

Di is a natural language description of the agent’s func-tionality ( Description ).  

> •

Ei = {ei, 1, e i, 2, . . . , e i,m } is a list of specific usage examples or few-shot prompts ( Examples ). Given a user query q, the objective is to retrieve a ranked subset of agents R ⊂ A (|R| ≪ N ) such that the relevance score S(q, a i) is maximized for ai ∈ R , subject to a latency constraint L < 400 ms. 

B. Offline: Deep-Granularity Indexing 

Unlike monolithic retrieval systems that compress all agent information into a single vector, GRAIL constructs three distinct indices to capture capability at different granularities. 

1) Sparse Index via Explicit Tags ( Itag ): We construct an inverted index mapping each tag t ∈ S Ti to the list of agents possessing it. This serves as a hard constraint filter. To handle non-explicitly present synonymous tags, we employ a synonym expansion dictionary during index construction. 

2) Context Index via Pseudo-Document Expansion ( Ictx ): 

Standard dense retrieval on short descriptions ( Di) often suf-fers from the “vocabulary mismatch” problem [29]. We adopt a document expansion strategy. For each agent ai, we utilize a Large Language Model (LLM) to generate a set of potential user queries Qsyn i based on Di [30]. A pseudo-document D′

> i

is formed by concatenating the original description and the synthetic queries: 

D′ 

> i

= Di ⊕ Concat (Qsyn i ) (1) We then encode D′ 

> i

into a dense vector v(i) 

> ctx

∈ Rd. This index 

Ictx captures the broad semantic context of the agent. It is important to note that synthetic queries serve a distinct purpose from the agent’s explicit usage examples for several reasons: 1) Broader Semantic Coverage: Synthetic queries, generated by an LLM based on the agent’s full description, can simulate a wider and more diverse range of user expressions, thus enhancing the broad semantic footprint of the agent for initial dense retrieval. 2) Addressing Vocabulary Mismatch: They are specifically designed to bridge the lexical gap be-tween formal agent descriptions and varied natural language user queries, optimizing for general recall. 3) Complementary Role: The usage examples are often limited in number and represent specific, fine-grained interaction patterns. Their role in our framework is to preserve these distinct capability modes for subsequent detailed matching, which is fundamentally different from the broad contextual matching aim of this index. This strategic separation ensures that each index dimension is optimized for its unique contribution to the multi-stage discovery process. 3) Intent Index via Fine-Grained Examples ( Iint ): This is the core of our deep-granularity approach. Instead of averaging the embeddings of usage examples Ei, which dilutes specific intent signals, we maintain the independence of each example. For each agent ai, we encode its examples into a matrix of embeddings Mi ∈ Rm×d:

Mi = [ Enc (ei, 1), Enc (ei, 2), . . . , Enc (ei,m )] (2) This matrix structure allows the system to preserve distinct capability modes (e.g., an agent capable of both “coding” and “plotting” will retain strong signals for both, rather than a blurred average). Notably, the Sparse Index ( Itag ) is a simple inverted index and does not require a vector database. In contrast, the construction of the Context Index ( Ictx ) and Intent Index (Iint ) necessitates the use of a vector database. For this, we leverage a pre-trained sentence transformer like BGE-M3 as the embedding model, which is used directly without further training. The resulting high-dimensional vectors are then or-ganized into the required structures: Ictx stores one vector per agent, representing its overall context, while Iint stores a matrix of vectors per agent, where each row corresponds to an encoded usage example. These structured vector data are then persistently stored in specialized vector databases or indexing libraries, enabling subsequent efficient retrieval and computation operations. 

C. Online: SLM-Driven Hybrid Retrieval 

To eliminate the latency bottleneck of LLM-based parsing, we introduce a pipelined retrieval mechanism driven by a Small Language Model (SLM). 

1) SLM Tag Prediction: Upon receiving a query q, we employ a fine-tuned SLM to predict the most likely capability tags ˆTq . The SLM is trained on pairs of (synthetic query , tags )

to minimize the cross-entropy loss. Through this training, the SLM learns to map diverse user intents to relevant tags, regardless of their granularity—encompassing both broad, high-level categories and specific, fine-grained unique tags that reflect specialized agent capabilities. 

ˆTq = SLM θ (q) (3) Since the output vocabulary is restricted to the system’s tag set, inference time is strictly bounded. 

2) Hybrid Recall: We perform parallel retrieval to generate a candidate set C: 

> •

Sparse Path: Retrieve agents whose capability tag set Ti

contains any of the predicted tags in ˆTq . This effectively acts as a broad filter using an OR logic across the predicted tags. Let this set be Csparse . 

> •

Dense Path: Encode q into vq and perform Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search on Ictx to retrieve top-k

agents. Let this set be Cdense .The initial candidate set is the union: C = Csparse ∪ C dense .This hybrid approach ensures high recall by combining explicit intent (tags) with implicit semantic matching (vectors). 

Algorithm 1: GRAIL Online Discovery Process 

Require: Query q, Indices Itag , I ctx , I int , SLM model M

Ensure: Top-K ranked agents R 

> 1:

Step 1: SLM Prediction  

> 2:

ˆTq ← M .predict (q) 

> 3:

vq ← Encoder (q) 

> 4:

Step 2: Hybrid Recall  

> 5:

Csparse ← Itag .lookup ( ˆTq ) 

> 6:

Cdense ← Ictx .search (vq , top k = 50)  

> 7:

C ← C sparse ∪ C dense  

> 8:

Step 3: MaxSim Re-ranking  

> 9:

for each agent ai in C do  

> 10:

Load example matrix Mi from Iint  

> 11:

Sres ← max( vq · Mi) 

> 12:

Sf inal ← α(vq · v(i)

> ctx

) + (1 − α)Sres  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Sort C by Sf inal descending  

> 15:

return Top-K agents from C

D. MaxSim Resonance Re-ranking 

The candidate set C is typically small (e.g., |C| = 50 ). We perform a fine-grained re-ranking using the MaxSim Reso-nance score. For each candidate agent ai ∈ C , we compute the interaction between the query vector vq and the agent’s example matrix Mi. The resonance score is defined as the maximum cosine similarity found across all examples: 

Sres (q, a i) = m

max 

> j=1

 vq · ei,j 

∥vq ∥∥ ei,j ∥



(4) 

Interpretation: This operation effectively measures if the user’s query “resonates” with any single specific capability 

demonstrated in the agent’s examples. Unlike average pooling, MaxSim is robust to noise; even if 9 out of 10 examples are irrelevant, a single high-match example triggers a high relevance score. The final ranking score Sf inal is a weighted sum of the context score and the resonance score: 

Sf inal (q, a i) = α · (vq · v(i)

> ctx

) + (1 − α) · Sres (q, a i) (5) where α is a hyperparameter balancing broad context context and specific intent. The detailed pseudocode for this entire online discovery pipeline is provided in Algorithm 1. The workflow of the GRAIL online discovery process is as shown in Fig. 3. The Discovery Engine coordinates the intent parsing (SLM/BGE), performs parallel hybrid recall across sparse ( Itag ) and dense ( Ictx ) indices, and executes MaxSim resonance re-ranking using fine-grained example ma-trices ( Iint ). 

E. Theoretical Analysis: The Signal Dilution Problem 

To rigorously justify the necessity of the MaxSim Reso-nance mechanism, we analyze the behavior of relevance scores under the multi-skilled agent assumption .User Discovery Engine SLM / BGE Hybrid Indices                       

> Query q
> Step 1: Intent Parsing
> Infer( q)
> Tags ˆTq, Vector vq
> Step 2: Hybrid Recall
> Parallel Path Lookup ˆTqin Itag
> Csparse
> Search vqin Ictx
> Cdense
> Step 3: Fusion & MaxSim Resonance
> C=Csparse ∪ C dense
> Fetch Mifor Cfrom Iint
> Matrices {Mi}
> Compute Sres (q, a i)
> Top-KRanked Agents

Fig. 3: Workflow of the GRAIL Online Discovery Process. 

Theorem 1 (Semantic Dilution in Mean Pooling). Let an agent a possess m distinct capabilities represented by normalized embedding vectors E = {e1, . . . , em}. Let q be a user query perfectly aligned with a specific capability ek

(i.e., q · ek = 1). If the agent’s capabilities are distinct (orthogonal in high-dimensional space), the relevance score retrieved by monolithic mean-pooling decays linearly with m,whereas MaxSim preserves the unitary signal strength. Proof: Let vavg be the monolithic vector representation of agent a used in traditional dense retrieval, typically computed via mean pooling: 

vavg = 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

ei (6) Assume the embedding space is high-dimensional (e.g., d =768 ) such that distinct capabilities are approximately orthog-onal. That is, for i̸ = j, ei · ej ≈ ϵ, where ϵ → 0.

Case 1: Traditional Mean Pooling Score ( Savg ). The relevance score for query q = ek is: 

Savg = q · vavg = ek · 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

ei

!

(7) 

= 1

m

ek · ek + X

> i̸=k

ek · ei

 (8) 

≈ 1

m (1 + ( m − 1) ϵ) ≈ 1

m (9) As the number of capabilities m increases (e.g., a “Swiss Army Knife” agent), the retrieval score Savg asymptotically approaches 0. This phenomenon, which we term Semantic Dilution , causes capable agents to be buried in the ranking list by specialized but irrelevant agents. 

Case 2: GRAIL MaxSim Score ( Smax ). In our framework, the relevance score is determined by the resonance mechanism: 

Smax = max  

> i

(q · ei) = max( ek · ek, . . . ) = 1 (10) 

Conclusion: Smax ≫ Savg for any m > 1. Thus, GRAIL maintains a constant high-confidence score invariant to the diversity of the agent’s other capabilities, theoretically guar-anteeing higher Recall@K for multi-purpose agents. IV. T HE AGENT TAXO -9K B ENCHMARK 

To evaluate the discovery performance of GRAIL in a massive and complex ecosystem, we establish AgentTaxo-9K 1, a novel large-scale benchmark dataset. Unlike existing datasets that often suffer from limited domain coverage or flat structures, AgentTaxo-9K provides a fine-grained, hierarchical organization of agent metadata and high-quality evaluation queries. 

A. Dataset Generation and Rationality 

The construction of AgentTaxo-9K follows a rigorous top-down generation pipeline designed to ensure structural in-tegrity, functional diversity, and semantic richness. The process is governed by the following key rules:  

> •

Industry Anchoring via OASF: The taxonomy is an-chored by 154 professional industry categories derived from the Open Agentic Schema Framework (OASF) 2. This ensures that the dataset’s root nodes align with established industrial and service sectors.  

> •

MECE-based Sub-domain Expansion: Each industry is expanded into 6 distinct sub-domains. To ensure the rationality of this expansion, we enforce the MECE (Mu-tually Exclusive and Collectively Exhaustive) principle. This rule ensures that the sub-domains within an industry cover its functional breadth without semantic overlap, facilitating clear categorical boundaries.  

> •

Functional Niche Specialization: For each sub-domain, 

10 unique agents are populated. The generation rules require that every agent must possess a distinct functional niche. Metadata—including a professional Name, a 50 -

100 word Description, and a set of 5-8 tags—is metic-ulously crafted to highlight the agent’s core capabilities and unique features that distinguish it from its peers in the same sub-domain.  

> •

Tagging Hierarchy: Each agent’s tag list is structured hierarchically to manifest its identity: 1 industry-level tag, 3 sub-domain-specific tags, and 1-4 unique functional tags. This cumulative tagging strategy provides the multi-level granularity required for precise capability-based discovery.  

> •

Multi-Intent Query Derivation: To evaluate the dis-covery engine’s robustness against varied user behav-iors, three distinct types of queries are generated for each agent: (1) Capability-based: Direct inquiries re-garding specific functions; (2) Scenario-based: Descrip-tions of real-world business problems or pain points; (3) Keyword-style: Concise, search-engine-style phrases focusing on niche specializations. 

> 1https://github.com/wolfbrother/AgentTaxo-9K
> 2https://github.com/agntcy/oasf

B. Dataset Statistics 

AgentTaxo-9K represents one of the most comprehensive benchmarks for agent discovery to date. The hierarchical statistics of the dataset are summarized as follows:  

> •

Scale: The dataset comprises 154 industries, which ex-pand into 924 sub-domains. With 10 agents per sub-domain, the benchmark contains a total of 9,240 unique agents.  

> •

Metadata Density: Every agent entry is equipped with a complete metadata profile, including a structured name, a detailed technical description, and a set of 5-8 descriptive tags. Additionally, each agent is accompanied by 3 high-quality usage examples to ground its functional scope.  

> •

Query Volume: The evaluation set consists of 27,720 

distinct user queries ( 3 queries per agent), covering a wide spectrum of linguistic patterns and search intents. 

> (a) Word cloud of high-frequency tags. Tags (Ranked by Frequency)
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> Log10(Frequency)
> Logarithmic Distribution Trend of All Tags
> (b) Log-transformed frequency distribution trend of all tags.

Fig. 4: Multi-dimensional distribution analysis of tags (Top: Tag word cloud; Bottom: Log-transformed frequency trend) By leveraging the OASF-based taxonomy and MECE ex-pansion, AgentTaxo-9K spans highly diverse fields—ranging from Environmental Science and Quantum Computing to 

Regulatory Compliance and Sports Management —providing a rigorous testbed for semantic routing and discovery algo-rithms. Statistical analysis of the 3,194 unique tags within the dataset reveals a characteristic long-tail distribution (Fig. 4b), where foundational sectors such as Environmental Science 

and Insurance establish a robust structural core. As visual-ized in the word cloud (Fig. 4a), this taxonomy effectively captures prominent industrial domains while maintaining a granular reach into highly specialized niche areas, including Quantum Computing and Bioinformatics. The log-transformed frequency curve underscores the dataset’s extensive coverage, ensuring that discovery algorithms are evaluated not only on high-frequency general requests but also on the sparse, complex edge cases essential for cross-domain agent inter-operability. V. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

To validate the effectiveness of the GRAIL framework, we conducted extensive experiments focusing on two key dimensions: Retrieval Accuracy (Recall and MRR) and System Latency . In this section, we describe the experimental setup, baseline methods, and the quantitative results. 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Hardware & Software Environment: All experiments were conducted on a Linux server running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS . The hardware configuration consists of a single NVIDIA T4 GPU (15.0 GB VRAM), 12.7 GB System RAM , and 112 GB Disk storage. The framework was implemented using 

Python 3.12 and PyTorch 2.1 . Vector operations and MaxSim resonance calculations were accelerated using CUDA tensors to simulate an in-memory high-dimensional retrieval engine. 

2) Model Configuration: We strictly decouple the training of the intent parser from the indexing process. The SLM is optimized using a training partition of query-tag pairs, whereas the retrieval engine maintains an exhaustive index of all agents. This Full-Pool Retrieval approach rigorously tests the framework’s ability to maintain high precision amidst the noise of a massive agent ecosystem. To ensure a rigorous evaluation and avoid data leakage, the synthetic queries used for Pseudo-Document Expansion were generated independently from the ground-truth UserQueries used in the evaluation phase.  

> •

SLM Predictor (Sparse Path): We fine-tuned Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct as the intent parser. The model was trained using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on 27,720 (Query, Tags) pairs derived from the training set. The inference is performed in half-precision (FP16) to minimize latency.  

> •

Dense Encoder (Context Path): We utilized BGE-Small-EN-v1.5 (33M parameters) as the backbone em-bedding model, mapping agent descriptions and examples into 384-dimensional vectors. 

B. Baselines and Comparisons 

We compare GRAIL against three distinct categories of retrieval paradigms to demonstrate the efficacy of our hybrid resonance approach.  

> •

Baseline 1: Monolithic Dense Retrieval (MDR). Astandard bi-encoder approach where the user query vector is matched against the mean-pooled embedding of the agent’s description. This represents the current state-of-the-art in lightweight vector search. • Baseline 2: Sparse-Only Retrieval (SLM-Sort). Amethod relying solely on the SLM to predict tags. Agents possessing the predicted tags are retrieved and ranked ran-domly. This baseline evaluates the isolated performance of the “Sparse Semantics”.  

> •

Baseline 3: LLM-Centric Routing (LLM). A “Think-then-Lookup” approach where a powerful LLM analyzes the query and selects the agent from the full list. While providing an accuracy upper bound, it serves as a baseline for latency comparison.  

> •

Ours: GRAIL (Hybrid + MaxSim). Our proposed framework integrating SLM-predicted sparse filtering, pseudo-document dense retrieval, and the fine-grained MaxSim Resonance re-ranking on agent examples. Each baseline method employs language models or embed-ding models in distinct ways. The MDR baseline relies on a pre-trained dense encoder to generate a single, monolithic embedding for each agent’s description, against which user queries are matched. For the SLM-Sort baseline, a fine-tuned SLM is utilized to predict capability tags from user queries, enabling lookup in a sparse inverted index. Lastly, the LLM 

baseline explicitly uses a powerful LLM to directly interpret user intent and route to the most suitable agent. 

C. Main Results 1) Retrieval Performance: Table I presents the comparative results on AgentTaxo-9K. We report Recall@1 (R@1) Re-call@10 (R@10) and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR@10). TABLE I: Performance Comparison on AgentTaxo-9K. Best results are bolded.                     

> Method R@1 R@10 MRR@10 Latency(ms)
> MDR 43.94 76.77 0.5455 12.52 SLM-Sort 0.07 0.51 0.0017 370.18 LLM-Router 36.84 78.95 0.5307 31186
> GRAIL (Ours) 71.54% 91.45% 0.7850 394 .48

As summarized in Table I, the GRAIL framework demon-strates a decisive advantage over all baselines. It achieves a 

Recall@1 of 71.54% and a Recall@10 of 91.45% , with an 

MRR@10 of 0.7850 . This indicates that GRAIL not only effectively captures the target agent but consistently ranks it as the primary recommendation. 

D. Performance and Efficiency Analysis 

1) Precision vs. Semantic Dilution: The performance gap between GRAIL and MDR demonstrates the severity of the Semantic Dilution problem. While MDR utilizes dense vectors, its reliance on mean-pooled embeddings causes it to lose functional nuances, resulting in an MRR of only 0.5455. GRAIL’s MaxSim Resonance overcomes this by preserving discrete capability signals from usage examples, leading to a 27.6% absolute improvement in Recall@1. 

2) The Failure of Sparse-Only Logic: The near-zero performance of SLM-Sort (Recall@10: 0.51%) exposes the 

One-to-Many Mapping bottleneck in large-scale repositories. High-cardinality industry tags map to hundreds of potential candidates, rendering sparse-only filtering ineffective without semantic discrimination. This highlights that SLM tag pre-diction must be paired with deep-granularity indexing to be viable. 

3) GRAIL vs. LLM-Centric Routing: The results for 

LLM-Router reveal a critical trade-off between reasoning depth and practical utility. Despite its high computational cost, the LLM-Router’s Recall@1 (36.84%) is surprisingly lower than even the MDR baseline, likely due to context window noise or Lost in the Middle effects when selecting from numerous candidates. Moreover, its staggering latency is nearly 80 × higher than GRAIL. This underscores that GRAIL achieves superior discovery accuracy while reducing latency by two orders of magnitude compared to heavy-weight LLM parsing. This efficiency confirms that GRAIL can handle complex intent parsing and fine-grained resonance at a negligible computational cost. 

4) Latency Composition: To verify the real-time capability, we measured the end-to-end latency per query on the T4 GPU. The average latency of GRAIL is 394 .48 ms , composed of:  

> •

SLM Inference: ≈ 370 .15 ms  

> •

Vector Search & MaxSim Calculation: ≈ 24 .33 ms This result confirms that our pipeline falls within the real-time interaction requirements for agent systems. VI. A BLATION STUDY 

To evaluate the contribution of each component within the GRAIL framework, we conduct an ablation study on the AgentTaxo-9K dataset with four variants: (1) Full GRAIL 

represents the complete system with SLM prediction, hybrid retrieval, and MaxSim resonance; (2) w/o MaxSim replaces the fine-grained resonance mechanism with standard mean-pooling cosine similarity to assess the impact of semantic dilution; (3) w/o SLM removes the sparse tag filtering, re-lying solely on dense retrieval to test the robustness of the context index; (4) MDR (Monolithic Dense Retrieval) serves as the traditional baseline using only monolithic description embeddings without any GRAIL-specific enhancements. The quantitative results are summarized in Table II. TABLE II: Ablation Study of GRAIL Components on AgentTaxo-9K.                        

> Variant R@1 R@10 MRR Drop (R@10) Full GRAIL 71.54% 91.45% 0.7850 -w/o MaxSim 43.94% 76.77% 0.5455 ↓14.68% w/o SLM 71.21% 90.48% 0.7793 ↓0.97% MDR 43.94% 76.77% 0.5455 ↓14.68%

A. Ablation Analysis 

As shown in Table II, the MaxSim Resonance mechanism is the most critical contributor to the framework’s precision. When MaxSim is replaced by mean pooling (w/o MaxSim), the Recall@10 drops significantly by 14.68% , and the MRR decreases from 0.7850 to 0.5455. This performance collapse empirically validates our Theorem 1 , demonstrating that mono-lithic embeddings suffer from severe semantic dilution when representing multi-functional agents. Interestingly, the SLM Filter (w/o SLM) shows a marginal drop of only 0.97% in Recall@10. This indicates that our Context Index (augmented by Pseudo-Document Expansion) already provides a robust semantic foundation. However, as noted in our latency analysis, the SLM predictor remains indispensable for achieving sub-50ms intent parsing and pro-viding explicit symbolic alignment for high-precision scenar-ios. Finally, the identical performance of MDR and the w/o MaxSim variant highlights that without granular resonance, the inclusion of extensive metadata cannot overcome the inherent limitations of coarse-grained vector matching. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We have presented GRAIL , a novel framework that rec-onciles the critical conflict between latency and precision in large-scale agent discovery. By orchestrating an SLM-driven intent parser with a fine-grained MaxSim resonance mech-anism, GRAIL successfully mitigates the semantic dilution problem inherent in monolithic embeddings while maintaining sub-400ms response times. Our results demonstrate that this deep-granularity approach not only outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in retrieval accuracy but also provides a scalable, high-throughput indexing infrastructure essential for the evolv-ing Internet of Agents ecosystem. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors contributed collectively to the research. How-ever, the specific visions and conceptual interpretations pre-sented herein are attributed to the corresponding author (xu-jinliang@caict.ac.cn; jlxufly@gmail.com) to reflect his current stage of thinking, and do not necessarily represent the official views of the other authors or their affiliated institutions. REFERENCES [1] R. Sapkota, K. I. Roumeliotis, and M. Karkee, “Ai agents vs. agentic ai: A conceptual taxonomy, applications and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10468 , 2025. [2] Y. Yang, M. Ma, Y. Huang, H. Chai, C. Gong, H. Geng, Y. Zhou, Y. Wen, M. Fang, M. Chen, et al. , “Agentic web: Weaving the next web with ai agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21206 , 2025. [3] Y. Chiang, E. Hsieh, C.-H. Chou, and J. Riebesell, “Llamp: Large language model made powerful for high-fidelity materials knowledge retrieval and distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17244 , 2024. [4] Z. Qiang, W. Wang, and K. Taylor, “Agent-om: Leveraging llm agents for ontology matching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00326 , 2023. [5] M. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Lu, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “Hierarchical multi-agent skill discovery,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 36, pp. 61759–61776, 2023. [6] L. A. d. A. Rodriguez and J. Parente, “An approach to support se-mantic discovery using ontologies to describe aeronautical web services repositories,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications , vol. 87, pp. 29–42, 2023. [7] Y. Yang, H. Chai, Y. Song, S. Qi, M. Wen, N. Li, J. Liao, H. Hu, J. Lin, G. Chang, et al. , “A survey of ai agent protocols,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16736 , 2025. [8] K. Mei, W. Xu, M. Guo, S. Lin, and Y. Zhang, “Omnirouter: Budget and performance controllable multi-llm routing,” ACM SIGKDD Explo-rations Newsletter , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 107–116, 2025. [9] A. Dhanasekar and K. Sujith, “Survey on multiagent based middleware,” 

Indian Journal of Natural Sciences , vol. 60, no. 90, pp. 96494–96500, 2025. [10] A. Ehtesham, A. Singh, G. K. Gupta, and S. Kumar, “A survey of agent interoperability protocols: Model context protocol (mcp), agent communication protocol (acp), agent-to-agent protocol (a2a), and agent network protocol (anp),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02279 , 2025. [11] J. Liu, K. Yu, K. Chen, K. Li, Y. Qian, X. Guo, H. Song, and Y. Li, “Acps: Agent collaboration protocols for the internet of agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13523 , 2025. [12] R. Surapaneni, “Announcing the agent2agent protocol (a2a).” Google for Developers Blog, apr 2025. [13] K. Huang, V. S. Narajala, J. Yeoh, J. Ross, R. Raskar, Y. Harkati, J. Huang, I. Habler, and C. Hughes, “A novel zero-trust identity framework for agentic ai: Decentralized authentication and fine-grained access control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19301 , 2025. [14] C. C. Liao, D. Liao, and S. S. Gadiraju, “Agentmaster: A multi-agent conversational framework using a2a and mcp protocols for multimodal information retrieval and analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2025 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pp. 52–72, 2025. [15] Anthropic, “Introducing the model context protocol.” Anthropic News, may 2025. [16] X. Fei, X. Zheng, and H. Feng, “Mcp-zero: Proactive toolchain con-struction for llm agents from scratch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01056 ,2025. [17] L. Muscariello and R. Polic, “Agent directory service,” Internet-Draft draft-mp-agntcy-ads-00, Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2025. Work in Progress. [18] G. Chang, E. Lin, C. Yuan, R. Cai, B. Chen, X. Xie, and Y. Zhang, “Agent network protocol technical white paper,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00007 , 2025. [19] S. G. Patil, T. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive apis,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 126544–126565, 2024. [20] Y. Qin, S. Liang, Y. Ye, K. Zhu, L. Yan, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, X. Cong, X. Tang, B. Qian, et al. , “Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 , 2023. [21] C. Greyling, “Small language models (SLMs) & classification.” Medium, 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-14. [22] P. Belcak, G. Heinrich, S. Diao, Y. Fu, X. Dong, S. Muralidharan, Y. C. Lin, and P. Molchanov, “Small language models are the future of agentic ai,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02153 , 2025. [23] V. Karpukhin, B. Oguz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, and W.-t. Yih, “Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question an-swering,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , (Online), pp. 6769–6781, Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2020. [24] S. Lupart, M. Aliannejadi, and E. Kanoulas, “Disco: Llm knowledge distillation for efficient sparse retrieval in conversational search,” in 

Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pp. 9–19, 2025. [25] E. Lumer, F. Nizar, A. Gulati, P. H. Basavaraju, and V. K. Subbiah, “Tool-to-agent retrieval: Bridging tools and agents for scalable llm multi-agent systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01854 , 2025. [26] O. Khattab and M. Zaharia, “Colbert: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction over bert,” in Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval , pp. 39–48, 2020. [27] K. Santhanam, O. Khattab, C. Potts, and M. Zaharia, “Plaid: An efficient engine for late interaction retrieval,” 2022. [28] M. Gospodinov, S. MacAvaney, and C. Macdonald, “Doc2query–: when less is more,” in European Conference on Information Retrieval ,pp. 414–422, Springer, 2023. [29] O. Weller, K. Lo, D. Wadden, D. Lawrie, B. Van Durme, A. Cohan, and L. Soldaini, “When do generative query and document expansions fail? a comprehensive study across methods, retrievers, and datasets,” in 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2024 ,pp. 1987–2003, 2024. [30] W. Zhang, Z. Liu, K. Wang, and S. Lian, “Query expansion and verification with large language model for information retrieval,” in In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Computing , pp. 341–351, Springer, 2024.