Title: MHPR: Multidimensional Human Perception and Reasoning Benchmark for Large Vision-Languate Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03485v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:39:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# MHPR: MULTIDIMENSIONAL HUMAN PERCEPTION AND REASONING BENCHMARK FOR LARGE VISION -LANGUATE MODELS 

Kangkang Wang 1,B,, Qinting Jiang 2,, Wanping Zhang 1, Bowen Ren 1,Shengzhao Wen 11AI Compute Group, Baidu 2Tsinghua University 

# ABSTRACT 

Multidimensional human understanding is essential for real-world applications such as film analysis and virtual digital humans, yet current LVLM benchmarks largely focus on single-task settings and lack fine-grained, human-centric eval-uation. In this work, we introduce MHPR, a comprehensive benchmark for joint perception–reasoning over human-centric scenes spanning individual, multi-person, and human–object interaction dimensions. MHPR comprises a multi-level data design—Captioned Raw Data (C-RD), Supervised Fine-Tuning Data (SFT-D), Reinforcement Learning Data (RL-D), and Test Data (T-D)—together with an automated caption/VQA generation pipeline (ACVG) that performs category-wise attribute decomposition, attribute-specific rewriting, and multi-model vot-ing to ensure high-quality, scalable annotations. We evaluate state-of-the-art vision–language models on fine-grained attributes (appearance, clothing, pose, parts) and high-level semantics (social relations, action semantics, spatial re-lations, intent and functionality). Our findings show that: 1) format-aligned SFT data substantially improves instruction following and stability; 2) challenge-focused RL data derived from bad-case analysis further enhances perception and reasoning on difficult instances; and 3) training Qwen2.5-VL-7B with MHPR yields significant gains, achieving near-parity with considerably larger models. We release ACVG and MHPR to facilitate reproducible, extensible research on human-centric perception and reasoning. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

In recent years, with the rapid development of intelligent retail, virtual digital humans, and film/video content analysis, automated and intelligent human-centric understanding has become a key technical foundation Fu et al. (2025); Li et al. (2024b); Zhou et al.; Dong et al. (2025); Chen et al. (2025b). The requirements in these real-world scenarios go far beyond simple recognition and detection of “people.” They demand fine-grained perception of an individual’s appearance, cloth-ing, actions, and identity, as well as an understanding of spatial and social relations among multiple people and complex human–object interactions, emotions, and functionality. For example, in film content analysis, accurately modeling group relationships, character identities, and dynamic inter-actions is central to intelligent content processing. However, existing datasets and Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) face severe limitations in supporting these needs, forming a bottleneck for downstream application intelligence Yu et al. (2016); Jiang et al. (2025b); Qin et al. (2025). Recent works such as RefCOCO Yu et al. (2016) and HumanRef Jiang et al. (2025b) have proposed human-centric detection benchmarks to evaluate and improve language-guided target localization (especially for human targets). Building on this line, HERM-Bench Li et al. (2024a) further intro-duces simple VQA tasks. Nevertheless, these efforts largely focus on single-task dimensions (e.g., detection or classification) and lack fine-grained annotations across the multidimensional spectrum 

† Equal Contribution 

B Emails: wangkangkang@baidu.com 

1                                    

> arXiv:2605.03485v1 [cs.CV] 5 May 2026 V-Grouding R-Grounding V-Perception V-Reasoning # of QA RefCoCo ✓✗✓✗41 kHERM-Bench ✓✗✓✗33 .4kHC-RefLoCo ✓✓✗✗720 kHumanRef ✓✗✓✗10 .9kFace-Human ✓✗✓✗50 .4kMHPR (Ours) ✓✓✓✓9.0k

Table 1: Comparison across benchmarks RefCoCo Yu et al. (2016), HERM-Bench Li et al. (2024a), HC-RefLoCo Wei et al. (2024), HumanRef Jiang et al. (2025b), Face-Human Qin et al. (2025) and MHPR (Ours). V-Grouding: Visual Grouding; R-Grounding: Reference Grouding; V-Perception: Visual perception; V-Reasoning: Visual Reasoning. of “individual–multi-person–human–object.” As a result, they fall short of supporting comprehen-sive understanding of human–human and human–object interactions in complex real-world scenes. This leads to multiple practical limitations: in virtual digital human generation, the lack of multi-dimensional, fine-grained human and interaction data results in limited visual diversity, less realis-tic social behavior, and weak semantic consistency between dialogue and actions; in film content analysis, systems struggle to robustly recognize group relations, character identities, and dynamic interactions within and across shots and narrative threads, thereby hindering character tracking, sum-marization, and content retrieval. The main differences between MHPR and other benchmarks are summarized in Table 1. To bridge this gap, we present a systematic and comprehensive human-centric benchmark: Mul-tidimensional Human Perception and Reasoning (MHPR). MHPR goes beyond basic capabilities such as person identification and localization, and conducts a joint evaluation along two core dimen-sions: perception and reasoning. Concretely, we organize evaluation across three complementary scenario dimensions—individual, multi-person, and human–object—to systematically capture in-dividual attributes, group relations, and interaction mechanisms. On the perception side, MHPR requires fine-grained human understanding, including appearance, clothing, accessories, pose, and local attributes. On the reasoning side, it further assesses the understanding of social attributes, action semantics, spatial relations, and the intent and functionality underlying human–human and human–object interactions. This design moves models beyond the mechanical verification of a tar-get’s presence toward deeper, context-aware comprehension of human motives, social relations, and situational interactions, thereby aligning with the high-level semantic and complex reasoning re-quirements in applications such as film analysis and virtual digital humans. Within MHPR, we introduce two key components: (1) a multi-level data structure and (2) an au-tomated captioning and VQA generation pipeline, ACVG. The multi-level data structure comprises four data types—Captioned Raw Data (C-RD), Supervised Fine-Tuning Data (SFT-D), Reinforce-ment Learning Data (RL-D), and Test Data (T-D)—with clear division of roles and seamless inter-operation: • C-RD (Captioned Raw Data): preserves the openness and extensibility of the benchmark. Researchers can use C-RD to customize new tasks and evaluation dimensions in future work, supporting continual evolution and domain transfer. • SFT-D (Supervised Fine-Tuning Data): consists of large-scale, task-related VQA samples whose elements and format are strictly aligned with T-D. It is used to learn fundamen-tal instruction-following abilities, reinforce pattern imitation and knowledge transfer, and provide a “usable and stable” initial policy and alignment baseline. • RL-D (Reinforcement Learning Data): serves as an advanced set built upon SFT-D. We conduct systematic bad-case analysis on model errors in T-D, summarize the main chal-lenges posed by MHPR tasks, and construct targeted VQA samples to specifically enhance perception and reasoning capabilities. • T-D (Test Data): used for objective evaluation and kept consistent with SFT-D in composi-tion and annotation paradigm, ensuring training–evaluation consistency and comparability. 2For data generation, prior work often adopts a “model generation + manual curation” pipeline, which is labor-intensive and poorly scalable. ACVG is the first to introduce a multi-model voting mech-anism, iteratively correcting inconsistencies in generated captions and VQA items to substantially improve annotation quality and semantic consistency. With minimal reliance on manual curation, ACVG produces high-quality data at scale, significantly reducing labor costs and improving through-put. The combination of a “multi-level data structure + automated ACVG pipeline” ensures both ex-tensibility and task alignment, while providing systematic data support for the SFT →RL capability progression. We train Qwen2.5-VL-7B using MHPR. Experimental results show substantial performance gains across multiple metrics, achieving near-parity with considerably larger models. Our main contribu-tions are summarized as follows: • We present MHPR, a human-centric, multidimensional benchmark. MHPR jointly evalu-ates perception and reasoning across three scenario dimensions—individual, multi-person, and human–object interaction—covering fine-grained attributes (appearance, clothing, pose, parts) and high-level semantics (social relations, action semantics, spatial relations, intent and functionality), thereby addressing key gaps in complex human-scene understand-ing. • We introduce a multi-level data design and an automated caption/VQA generation pipeline, ACVG. The data stack comprises C-RD, SFT-D, RL-D, and T-D: C-RD preserves open-ness and extensibility; SFT-D is format-aligned with T-D to provide a stable instruction-following baseline; RL-D is constructed via bad-case analysis on T-D to target core chal-lenges with advanced VQA for perception and reasoning. ACVG employs multi-model voting, consistency correction, and targeted attribute rewriting, enabling selective correc-tion of designated attributes while preserving the remaining content of the original caption as much as possible, thereby producing high-quality captions and VQA with minimal hu-man curation, greatly reducing manual costs and improving scalability. • Using MHPR, we train Qwen2.5-VL-7B and observe substantial improvements across multiple metrics, achieving near-parity with much larger models. These results validate MHPR’s effectiveness in enhancing fine-grained perception and high-level reasoning for human-centric scenarios. 

# 2 MHPR B ENCHMARK 

2.1 DATA SOURCE SELECTION 

Our data sources consist of three open-source datasets from different domains that provide seman-tically rich raw corpora: COYO-700M contributes a large-scale, open-domain, stylistically diverse collection of image–text pairs; HumanCaption-10M offers broad-coverage, fine-grained, human-centric descriptions; and HumanCaption-HQ-311K serves as a high-confidence, low-noise refined subset for alignment and calibration. Together, they complement each other to provide breadth, depth, and stability for MHPR’s data generation, task alignment, and evaluation: • HumanCaption-HQ-311K Dai et al. (2025) is an open-source, high-quality human-centric caption dataset designed to train and evaluate multimodal/vision-language models on fine-grained human and scene understanding. It contains approximately 311K high-quality im-age captions with auxiliary metadata, covering multi-dimensional aspects such as appear-ance, clothing, pose, actions, local attributes, and contextual human–human/human–object interactions. The data are produced via a semi-automated pipeline with multi-model con-sistency checking, followed by rigorous quality control and denoising to balance coverage and accuracy. HumanCaption-HQ-311K supports supervised fine-tuning, data augmenta-tion, and instruction alignment, and is particularly suitable for human-centric fine-grained perception and reasoning tasks, including person retrieval, action understanding, relation recognition, and human–object interaction comprehension. • HumanCaption-10M Dai et al. (2025) is a large-scale, open-source human-centric caption dataset designed to supply broad-coverage, fine-grained, and context-rich training corpora 3for multimodal/vision-language models. It comprises approximately 10 million image cap-tions with accompanying metadata, spanning appearance, detailed clothing attributes, pose and actions, facial expressions and local parts, as well as multi-person interactions, gaze and spatial relations, and contextual human–object manipulation and functional cues. Built via an efficient semi-automated pipeline with multi-model consistency checking, noise sup-pression, and quality stratification, HumanCaption-10M balances scale and accuracy, sup-porting supervised fine-tuning, instruction alignment, and data augmentation. It is particu-larly suitable for enhancing generalization and robustness on tasks such as person retrieval, action and relation understanding, human–object interaction, fine-grained attribute recog-nition, and narrative consistency modeling. • COYO-700M Lu et al. (2023) is a large-scale, open-source image–text pair dataset de-signed as a general-purpose pretraining corpus for multimodal/vision-language models. It comprises approximately 700 million image–text pairs collected from diverse web sources, spanning a wide range of domains, visual styles, and linguistic expressions, with strong diversity and long-tail coverage. The dataset is preprocessed via large-scale deduplica-tion, basic safety and quality filtering, text cleaning, and language identification to improve usability and robustness at scale. COYO-700M supports contrastive pretraining (CLIP-style), image–text matching, cross-modal retrieval, general CPT/pretraining, and serves as a broad-coverage foundation for downstream SFT, substantially enhancing cross-domain generalization. 2.2 DATA DIMENSION 

Category Topic Description 

Single Per. Appearances Hairstyle, facial features, body build, etc. Attributes Age, gender, ethnicity, occupation, etc. Multiple Per. Relations Relations between multiple individuals. Comparisons Commonalities or differences between individuals. Per. and Obj. Interactions Interactions between a target person and objects. Table 2: Our evaluation dimensions primarily include Single Person, Multiple Persons, and Per-son–Object Interaction, covering multiple levels from perception to reasoning. After determining the data sources, we annotate captions and construct VQA tasks for the raw data. We divide the data into three dimensions—single person, multiple persons, and per-son–object—capturing multidimensional interactions between humans and themselves, society, and the surrounding environment. Specifically, each dimension includes the following attributes: • Single person . Appearance: hairstyle, facial features, body shape, skin tone, clothing, accessories, pose and actions, expressions, etc.; Attributes: age, gender, ethnicity, occupa-tion; Referential localization: identify a specific person based on explicit attributes such as appearance and pose. • Multiple persons . Interpersonal relations: understand various relationships among multi-ple individuals in the image, such as interactions, social ties, and spatial relations; Com-parative analysis: analyze similarities and differences between individuals, e.g., common-alities/differences in attire and identity. • Person and object . Identify and reason about interactions between a specific person and non-human objects in the image. With this partitioning, we extend beyond standalone human recognition to encompass hu-man–environment interactions, mirroring diverse states in the real world. In the subsequent caption annotation and VQA generation, we will address these three dimensions separately. The details can be seen in Table 2. 42.3 AUTOMATED CAPTIONING AND VQA G ENERATION PIPELINE (ACVG) In ACVG, we aim to leverage existing LVLMs to automatically produce high-quality caption anno-tations and VQA tasks, thereby improving labeling efficiency and reducing manual screening costs. ACVG comprises two components: a caption auto-annotation pipeline and a VQA auto-generation pipeline. 2.3.1 CAPTION AUTO -A NNOTATION PIPELINE (CAAP) In existing work, images first undergo a preliminary screening to filter out low-quality samples. The filtered samples are then captioned once by an LVLM (e.g., GPT-4o). These captioned images are subsequently reviewed by human annotators, which becomes labor-intensive at scale. Our pipeline, CAAP, focuses on two goals: (1) automating the filtering of low-quality samples, and (2) automati-cally producing accurate captions for the screened images. 

Pipline for automating the filtering of low-quality samples. To ensure reliable downstream human-attribute analysis and VQA construction, we build a four-stage screening pipeline: human detection, scale filtering, keypoint completeness checking, and collage-image filtering. We rely on reproducible open-source implementations and calibrate key thresholds on a development split. The specific implementation details are as follows: 

Stage 1: Human Detection and Initial Filtering We adopt the Group-DINO human detector from PaddleDetection with the configuration 

configs/group detr/group dino vit huge 4scale 1x coco.yml . The detec-tion confidence threshold is set to 0.5, selected after scanning [0 .3, 0.7] to balance recall and false positives. Images with no human bounding boxes meeting the threshold are discarded. 

Stage 2: Human Scale Filtering For each image, we compute the ratio r = Amax /A img , where 

Amax is the area of the largest human bounding box and Aimg is the image area. If r < 0.10 , the image is removed. This eliminates cases where the main subject is too small to support reliable attribute extraction (e.g., apparel texture, facial expression, accessories). 

Stage 3: Keypoint Completeness Check We employ MMPose YOLOX-Pose with configuration 

configs/yolox-pose s 8xb32-300e coco.py . Human detections from Stage 1 are used to crop/align regions, on which we run keypoint detection. For each human box, we count keypoints with confidence above 0.5; if fewer than 4 keypoints are present, the instance is considered incom-plete (occlusion, truncation, severe blur) and is discarded. If no instances in an image satisfy the rule, the entire image is removed. 

Stage 4: Collage-Image Filtering Web-crawled data often contains collages (multi-panel grids, comparison plates, product mosaics), which differ markedly from natural scenes and hin-der attribute modeling. We curated a binary classification dataset of ∼20k images (collage vs. non-collage) with manual labels, and trained a classifier using PaddleClas ResNet50 vd (./ppcls/configs/quick start/ResNet50 vd.yaml ). Training uses standard augmen-tations (random crop, horizontal flip), cosine-annealed learning rate, early stopping, and class reweighting or resampling if imbalanced. At inference, images with P (collage ) ≥ τ (default 

τ = 0 .5) are discarded. The complete procedure can be found in Algorithm 1. 

Pipline for automatically producing accurate captions for the screened images. This pipline consolidates multiple locally generated captions into a single, more accurate human-centric descrip-tion, minimizing the need for manual review. The system comprises three stages: (i) structured disagreement detection (GetDiff), (ii) conflict correction via multi-source voting (Vote), and (iii) schema-level fusion into a final caption (Mix). We define a fixed schema for human-related attributes (e.g., gender, age group, apparel categories and colors, accessories, actions, and scene context). Each attribute has required fields and admis-sible values. All intermediate artifacts are stored as JSON dictionaries keyed by attribute, enabling deterministic merging and auditability. The details can be found in Figure 1. 5Algorithm 1 Human-centric Data Cleaning Pipeline 

Require: Image set I; detectors Dhuman , Dkpt ; collage classifier C; thresholds θ = 0 .5 (bbox score), 

ρ = 0 .10 (area ratio), κ = 0 .5 (kpt score), Kmin = 4 (min keypoints), τ = 0 .5 (collage prob). 

Ensure: Filtered image set I⋆. 

> 1:

I⋆ ← ∅ . 

> 2:

for all I ∈ I do  

> 3:

B ← { b | D human (I) with score (b) ≥ θ} 

> 4:

if B = ∅ then  

> 5:

continue ▷ discard: no human  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Compute r = max b∈B area (b) 

> area (I)
> 8:

if r < ρ then  

> 9:

continue ▷ discard: subject too small  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

B′ ← ∅  

> 12:

for all b ∈ B do  

> 13:

Crop I to region Ib aligned with b 

> 14:

Kb ← { k | D kpt (Ib), score (k) ≥ κ} 

> 15:

if |K b| ≥ Kmin then  

> 16:

B′ ← B ′ ∪ { b} 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

if B′ = ∅ then  

> 20:

continue ▷ discard: incomplete humans  

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

p ← C (I) ▷ probability of collage  

> 23:

if p ≥ τ then  

> 24:

continue ▷ discard: collage image  

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

I⋆ ← I ⋆ ∪ { I} 

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

return I⋆

Step 1: GetDiff — Structured Disagreement Detection. Inputs. Three local captions describing the same image, produced by qwen , intern and llama .

Procedure. 

1. A strong LLM (qwen3-32B in our implementation) parses each caption into the predefined attribute schema. 2. For every attribute, the parsed fields are compared and labeled as one of three categories: • Conflict : both captions mention the attribute but provide incompatible values; • Missing : the attribute appears in only one caption; • No-conflict : values are identical or semantically equivalent. 

Outputs. A diff dictionary listing all conflicted or missing attributes together with evidence snippets from each caption. Because the output is structured, iterating over the dictionary directly reveals which attributes require correction. 

Step 2: Vote — Conflict Correction with Multi-Caption Evidence. Inputs. The diff dictionary and three local captions ( qwen , intern , llama4 ) as reference evidence. 

Procedure. 

1. For each conflicted or missing attribute, aggregate the corresponding fields from all three captions and present them (together with the image) to the LLM. 2. Instruct the LLM to “vote”: prefer majority agreement when present; when disagreement persists, defer to visual grounding cues. 6Qwen2.5 -VL 

> Llama4
> Intern3 -VL

Models             

> She wears silver
> rings and a
> white watch
> She wears silver
> rings
> She wears red
> rings and a
> white watch

Captions    

> Qwen3
> Qwen3
> Awhite watch
> Red/Silver rings

Differences       

> Missing item
> Conflict item
> 1.Awhite watch
> 2.Red Sliver rings

Merge d Diff 

Input             

> She wears silver
> rings and a
> white watch
> She wears silver
> rings
> She wears red
> rings and a
> white watch

Captions         

> She wears silver
> rings or red ring s
> and awhite watch

Mix Caption       

> 1.Awhite watch
> 2.Red Sliver rings

Merged Diff         

> Qwen3
> Awhite
> watch and
> red rings
> She wears silver
> rings and a
> white watch

Qwen Caption     

> Awhite watch
> and red rings

Final Diff Qwen3 

> Caption

Final Diff 

Step 1: GetDiff 

Step 2: Vote Step 3: Mix Figure 1: Overall pipeline for CAAP , including three steps: GetDiff, Vote and Mix. 3. The LLM returns a corrected value with a confidence score and an optional brief rationale for auditing. 

Outputs. A correction dictionary containing the resolved values for all conflicted/missing attributes. 

Step 3: Mix — Fusion into the Final Caption. Inputs. The baseline qwen local caption and the correction dictionary. 

Procedure. 

1. Parse the baseline caption into the attribute schema. 2. Overwrite conflicted/missing fields using the correction dictionary. 3. Ask the LLM to realize the updated schema as a fluent, image-grounded caption while ensuring internal consistency. 

Outputs. A single, more accurate final caption per image. 

Implementation Details. 

• Caption generators: qwen2.5-vl-72B, intern3-vl-78B, and llama-4-maverick-17B-128e-instruct produce the local captions. • Orchestrator: qwen3-32B executes GetDiff , Vote , and Mix .• Reproducibility: All intermediate JSONs (parsed schemas, diffs, votes, fusion schemas) are persisted to enable exact reruns and error analysis. • Failure handling: Attributes whose voting confidence falls below a threshold are flagged for optional human review; otherwise, the pipeline proceeds autonomously. Based on the above procedure, we obtain high-quality, automatically annotated raw data after filter-ing, providing a solid data foundation for subsequent tasks. 7Qwen3    

> The three answers
> are consistent

VQA Auto -Generation Pipeline                  

> Hewears a
> black watch and
> blue shoes
> She wears pink
> rings and a
> white watch
> She wears silver
> rings and a
> white watch
> Task Subjec t
> Generation Prompt

+           

> What brand is
> his watch?
> What material
> is his ring?
> What is his
> hairstyle?
> Do es he have
> atattoo?
> Q1
> Q2
> Q3
> Qn

…  

> Qwen2.5 -VL
> Llama4
> Intern3 -VL
> Answer 1
> Answer 2
> Answer 3
> The three answers
> conflict
> Answer

Captions 

Prompt 

Q Library 

Figure 

Model 

Input /Output 

Analysis Figure 2: Overall pipeline for VAGP , including three steps: VQA Generation, Vote and Manual Review. 2.3.2 VQA A UTO -G ENERATION PIPELINE (VAGP) We propose the VQA Auto-Generation Pipeline (VAGP), which exploits the high-quality raw data produced by the preceding automatic annotation process to automatically construct task-relevant VQA samples along three semantic dimensions: single-person, multi-person, and human–object. The goal is to generate questions and answers in a largely automated manner while ensuring strong relevance to the image and decidability from visible evidence; minimal human verification is invoked only when models disagree. The details can be found in Figure 2. 

Stage 1: Question Proposal Given an image I, its high-quality caption, and a task topic with de-scription, a general-purpose LLM is prompted to produce a set of candidate QAs. Prompts strictly require that questions be decidable from visible cues only, avoid subjective/causal reasoning and external knowledge, remove referential ambiguity, and obey length limits for both questions and an-swers. The generated questions explicitly cover the three dimensions (single-person / multi-person / human–object) and carry internal tags for type and expected answer format (e.g., counting, attribute, relation, action, spatial; boolean / numeric / short token). 

Stage 2: Tri-MLLM Answering Each candidate question with the original image is fed in par-allel to three heterogeneous or differently sized multimodal LLMs (MLLM1/2/3), yielding answers 

{Ai, 1, A i, 2, A i, 3}. To enable robust comparison, answers are normalized by lowercasing, stripping punctuation, aligning numbers and number words, and mapping common synonyms. Format checks are enforced (booleans restricted to yes/no , counting to non-negative integers, colors/apparel/ac-tions constrained by controlled vocabularies). Questions that show evident conflicts with the caption are discarded. 

Stage 3: Consistency Filtering Consistency is decided from the three answers. Exact three-way agreement is marked as an easy case and accepted as a high-confidence automatic sample. Otherwise, the item is labeled hard/ambiguous and sent to a small human-review pool; optionally, a “two-way agreement” weak-consistency tag is recorded to support semi-automatic correction or retraining. To maintain distributional balance, quotas or weighted sampling are applied across the three semantic dimensions and question types. 

Implementation and Outputs The LLM for question generation and the three answering MLLMs are decoupled for flexible configuration; batched parallel inference with cache reuse reduces cost. All intermediates and final artifacts (questions, raw and normalized answers from the three models, consistency labels, and metadata) are stored in JSON for reproducibility and auditing. Each finalized VQA item is recorded as 

(I, question , answer , topic , type , normalized answer , A i, 1, A i, 2, A i, 3, consistency label , metadata ).

Easy cases are used directly for training/evaluation, while hard/ambiguous cases undergo human verification or semi-automatic correction. Through this procedure, we obtain the training set for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) as well as the final test set. 82.4 EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS <think> “bbox_2d”: [145, 26, 424,           

> 719]. The player‘s left foot is
> positioned near the soccer ball,
> indicating that he is likely using it
> to control or kick the ball. The right
> foot is not in contact with the ball
> </think>
> <answer> left foot </answer>
> Ground truth: right foot
> Which part of the
> body is the player
> using to interact with
> the soccer ball?
> Question
> Answe r
> Ground truth: Don’t know
> Who is responsible
> for igniting the drink
> in the glass ?
> Question
> Answe r
> <think> “bbox_2d”: [ 1, 46, 1377,
> 2422 ]. The person holding the
> glass appears to be the one
> responsible for this action, as they
> are the only one in close proximity
> to the drink</think>
> <answer> The women holding the
> glass </answer>
> Ground truth: hold hands
> Is the bride making
> any hand movements
> toward the groom?
> Question
> Answe r
> <think> “bbox_2d”: [646, 190,
> 1194, 891]. the bride's hands are
> resting on her lap, holding the
> bouquet. There are no visible hand
> movements or gestures towards
> the groom
> </think>
> <answer> No </answer>

Figure 3: examples of bad cases, respectively covering spatial understanding, reasoning, and fine-grained perception. We first perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the large-scale VQA data constructed along the three semantic dimensions, enabling the model to acquire basic domain knowledge and standardized output formats. However, this dataset contains many easy cases and only a few challenging ones, lacking targeted difficulty, and thus provides limited improvement to practical reasoning ability. To address this, we aim to curate a focused set of samples as a training set for reinforcement learning (RL). The detials can be found in Figure 3. Concretely, we evaluate an existing LVLM (e.g., Qwen2.5-VL-7B) on the test set, collect all incor-rectly answered instances, and conduct a systematic bad case analysis to summarize common failure modes in reasoning. For these error cases, we instruct the model to produce a chain-of-thought along with the final answer, in order to precisely locate the source of errors. The corresponding prompt template is as follows: 

This is a human-centric visual question answering task. Rely only on visible evidence from the image; avoid subjective assumptions and external knowledge. Before providing the answer, follow these steps: Step 1. Select and output the bounding box of the person or object most relevant to the question; Step 2. Based on the selected box, provide concise evidence bullet points and a brief, observable reasoning summary; Step 3. Give a concise answer in the format specified by the question. 

We analyzed all bad cases and identified three recurring capability gaps exhibited by current LVLMs on our benchmark: spatial relations, fine-grained perception, and calibration of reasoning depth. Detailed findings are as follows: • Spatial relations. The model struggles to determine whether a question is posed from the camera/viewer perspective or the agent’s first-person perspective, and it frequently errs on absolute vs. relative spatial judgments. For example, an athlete is striking the ball with the right foot, so the correct answer is “right foot.” However, because the ball appears on the left side of the image, the model answers “left foot.” The chain-of-thought reveals the model failed to disambiguate the intended viewpoint. • Fine-grained perception. The model has difficulty perceiving small, overlapping, or back-ground details, and lacks robust fine-grained categorization. In one case, the bride and groom are holding hands, so the correct answer is “A. Yes, she is holding his hand.” A bouquet partially occludes the bride’s hand, leading the model to misperceive the scene and output “C. No, her hands are occupied with something else.” • Reasoning depth. The model is poorly calibrated with respect to how much reasoning is warranted. Some questions require direct description or binary judgment; others require 9limited inference grounded in visible cues. In one example, a woman holds a glass with no additional action shown and no evidence that she ignited the drink; the appropriate answer is “I don’t know.” The model, however, infers that she lit the drink merely because she is touching the glass, constituting over-reasoning beyond the evidence. We have accordingly constructed a targeted VQA dataset focused on three core challenges: spa-tial relation reasoning, fine-grained perception, and calibration of reasoning depth. The samples deliberately cover complex scenarios and confounders, including viewpoint ambiguity (first-person vs. camera view), confusion between absolute and relative positions, occlusion and small-object detection, within-class fine categorization and background interference, as well as prompts that re-quire “appropriate reasoning” rather than over-inference. Compared with general VQA corpora, this collection features a more targeted and diagnostic difficulty distribution, enabling systematic characterization and mitigation of model weaknesses along these dimensions. For training, we plan to use this collection in a dedicated reinforcement learning (RL) stage, in-cluding but not limited to: enforcing consistency with visible evidence via the reward function, regularizing reasoning span and confidence, and shaping rewards for spatial consistency and fine-grained recognition. By optimizing on these high-value samples with RL, we aim to substantially improve the model’s stability in spatial reasoning, accuracy in fine-grained perception, and calibra-tion of reasoning depth, thereby achieving more reliable and interpretable performance in complex real-world VQA scenarios. 

# 3 EXPERIMENT 

3.1 SETUP 

The base model used in our training framework is Qwen2.5-VL-7B Bai et al. (2025), a general-purpose multimodal instruction-tuned model that demonstrates strong performance in visual un-derstanding and system prompt adherence. It is not specifically optimized for advanced reasoning through dedicated reinforcement learning, making it a suitable backbone for evaluating reasoning-oriented improvements. We fine-tune the model using supervised fine-tuning (SFT). During training, the vision encoder is frozen, and only the projection layer and the large language model are updated. 3.2 TRAINING PARAMETERS 

During the SFT process, the following parameters were utilized: A learning rate of 5×10 −5, a warm-up of 0.02, and a train batch size of 3. We apply a cutoff length of 8192 for generated responses, and then trained the model for 2 epoch to obtain Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT .3.3 EVALUATION 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our model, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT, a series of exper-iments were conducted across multiple subsets. Table 3 presents a detailed comparison of accuracy percentages for Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct Bai et al. (2025), InternVL3-8B Zhu et al. (2025). The evaluation set comprises 10 subjects in total. Person and Object includes 

Subject 1 (function and usage) and Subject 5 (actions and interactions). Multiple Person covers 

Subject 2 (interactions and behaviors), Subject 3 (social relationships), and Subject 4 (clothing and accessories). Single Person consists of Subject 6 (physical appearance), Subject 7 (clothing and accessories), Subject 8 (actions and behaviors), Subject 9 (identity and background), and Sub-ject 10 (distinctive attributes). 

Overall Performance: As shown in Table 3, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT achieved an average accuracy of 81.40%, outperforming all other models tested. This demonstrates the effectiveness of training on the custom dataset we constructed, which emphasized fine-grained perception and reasoning capabilities. The model consistently outperformed its competitors across most subsets, showcasing its robustness and generalization abilities. 

Subset Specific Performance: Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT achieved the highest accuracy in most subsets (e.g., sub1, sub3, sub4, sub5, sub6, sub7, and sub8, sub9, sub10), with key improvements observed in sub4 (82.41%), sub5 (69.08%), sub6 (78.39%), sub7 (81.94%) and sub8 (62.32%). These results 10 Table 3: Performance (Accuracy %) comparison of different models across multiple subsets. The best results are highlighted in bold. Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT is the model trained on a custom dataset that we constructed.                    

> Model sub1 sub2 sub3 sub4 sub5 sub6 sub7 sub8 sub9 sub10 Average Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT 96.92 78.10 90.66 82.41 69.08 78.39 81.94 62.32 87.50 86.67 81.40
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 96.92 80.95 90.66 78.70 67.63 74.37 74.84 55.07 87.50 86.67 79.33 InternVL3-8B 96.92 80.48 90.66 78.70 68.12 70.35 74.37 54.84 81.97 80.00 77.64

highlight the model’s strength in addressing fine-grained reasoning and perception tasks. Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct achieved the second-best overall performance, with an average accuracy of 79.33%. InternVL3-8B lagged behind Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT, achieving average accuracies of 77.64%. These models struggled with subsets that required nuanced reasoning, such as sub5 and sub8. 

Key Observations: Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT’s strength in perception and reasoning: The results re-flect the advantage of using our custom dataset, which was specifically designed to enhance fine-grained perception (e.g., appearance, pose, and parts) and reasoning (e.g., social relations, intent, and functionality). Performance gap in challenging subsets: While Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT excelled in most subsets, there is room for improvement in subsets like sub5 (69.08%) and sub8 (62.32%), where models faced challenges in handling intricate contextual cues and interactions. In summary, the evaluation results strongly validate the effectiveness of our custom training dataset and methodology in enhancing the fine-grained perception and reasoning capabilities of Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT. The model’s significant performance gains across multiple subsets establish it as a highly competitive approach for human-centric vision-language tasks. 

# 4 DISCUSSIONS 

Joint modeling of perception and reasoning is critical for performance gains. Experimental results on MHPR show that jointly modeling fine-grained perception and high-level semantic rea-soning is essential for improving human-centric visual understanding. Unlike datasets or training paradigms that focus on a single dimension (e.g., detection or attribute recognition), MHPR con-strains models across the individual–multi-person–human–object axes. This encourages models not only to perceive subtle visual cues (such as body parts, clothing, and pose), but also to reason about spatial relations, social interactions, and intent or functionality. This perception–reasoning inte-gration largely explains why Qwen2.5-VL-7B achieves consistent improvements across multiple subsets. 

Format-aligned SFT data substantially improves stability and instruction following. The ex-perimental comparisons indicate that SFT-D, which is strictly aligned with the test set (T-D) in task composition and answer format, significantly enhances output stability and consistency. Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT outperforms Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct and InternVL3-8B on most subsets, demonstrat-ing that high-quality, format-consistent supervised data is often more effective than simply increas-ing model size for complex human-centric understanding tasks. This validates the role of SFT-D in MHPR as a stable alignment baseline. 

Bad-case–driven RL data effectively addresses core capability gaps. Through systematic anal-ysis of incorrect predictions on T-D, MHPR identifies three recurring failure modes in current LVLMs: spatial relations, fine-grained perception, and calibration of reasoning depth. Compared with generic VQA corpora, RL-D is explicitly constructed to target these weaknesses, covering viewpoint ambiguity (first-person vs. camera view), confusion between relative and absolute spatial judgments, occlusion and small-object perception, and cases where “I don’t know” is the appro-priate answer. Such challenge-focused data provides high-value learning signals for reinforcement learning, improving robustness on difficult instances. 

Spatial understanding and viewpoint modeling remain major challenges. Bad-case analysis re-veals that errors related to spatial reasoning constitute a large portion of overall failures. Models frequently confuse image-based left/right with the agent’s own left/right, or fail to distinguish be-11 tween camera and actor viewpoints. This suggests that scale alone is insufficient to resolve spatial reasoning issues, and that future work may benefit from explicitly modeling viewpoints or enforcing spatial-consistency constraints during training Zhang et al. (2025b; 2024); AI et al. (2025); Ouyang (2025). 

Fine-grained perception is highly sensitive to occlusion and background clutter. Despite MHPR’s emphasis on fine-grained attributes, models remain vulnerable to occlusion, small targets, and complex backgrounds. For example, partial occlusion of hands by objects (e.g., a bouquet) of-ten leads to incorrect judgments about hand interactions. These findings highlight the need for more robust local perception mechanisms, such as region-level supervision or localized reward shaping, to further enhance fine-grained recognition. 

Calibration of reasoning depth is more important than reasoning length. We observe that models may either over-reason—drawing unwarranted conclusions without sufficient visual ev-idence—or under-calibrate by producing unnecessarily verbose reasoning for simple perceptual judgments. MHPR explicitly treats reasoning-depth calibration as a core challenge, emphasizing evidence-grounded and appropriately scoped reasoning. This suggests that high-quality human-centric understanding requires not only the ability to reason, but also the ability to determine when 

and how much reasoning is warranted Wang et al. (2025); Bigverdi et al. (2025). 

Small models can be highly competitive with well-designed data and tasks. Notably, Qwen2.5-VL-7B trained with MHPR achieves near-parity with, and in some cases outperforms, substantially larger models such as Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct. This result underscores the importance of carefully designed multidimensional benchmarks, targeted training objectives, and high-quality automated annotation pipelines. Together, these factors can significantly amplify the capabilities of relatively small models, offering more practical and cost-effective solutions for real-world human-centric vi-sion–language applications. 

# 5 RELATED WORKS 

5.1 HUMAN -C ENTRIC BENCHMARK 

RefCOCO Yu et al. (2016) and RefCOCO+ Yu et al. (2016) are large-scale referring expression benchmarks built upon MSCOCO, where images are selected to contain multiple instances of the same object category and annotated with natural language expressions that uniquely identify a tar-get object. RefCOCO allows unrestricted descriptions, while RefCOCO+ prohibits explicit location words to encourage appearance-based discrimination; both primarily evaluate language-guided vi-sual grounding and object-level comprehension. However, these datasets focus on single-object localization and short, discriminative phrases, lacking fine-grained human-centric attributes, multi-person relational modeling, and higher-level reasoning (e.g., social relations, intent, and function-ality), which limits their ability to assess joint perception–reasoning capabilities compared with MHPR. HERM-Bench Li et al. (2024a) is a human-centric multimodal benchmark designed to eval-uate MLLMs on fine-grained person understanding. It spans eight dimensions covering both basic perception (e.g., appearance, pose, grounding) and complex understanding (e.g., multi-person re-lations and reasoning), using multiple-choice and localization tasks. Unlike general benchmarks. Compared with MHPR, HERM-Bench mainly focuses on fine-grained human perception and ba-sic relational understanding. Its reasoning is largely grounded in visible cues and structured QA formats. In contrast, MHPR emphasizes deeper semantic reasoning, such as social relations and intent inference. Therefore, HERM-Bench is relatively limited in evaluating higher-level joint per-ception–reasoning capabilities. HC-RefLoCo Wei et al. (2024) substantially extends earlier human-centric REC benchmarks (e.g., HC-RefCOCO/+/g) by introducing large-scale data and long, de-tailed referring expressions (avg. 93.2 words) with rich vocabulary and sentence-level subject la-bels, enabling fine-grained and scale-aware evaluation of multimodal grounding under diverse IoU criteria. Unlike prior benchmarks that rely on short phrases and limited samples, it emphasizes long-context understanding and precise localization. HC-RefLoCo primarily focuses on explicit visual–text alignment for long-context instance grounding, and thus lacks the ability to evaluate higher-level joint perception–reasoning over complex social relations, intentions, and implicit hu-man semantics. In contrast, our MHPR explicitly addresses these limitations by incorporating tasks that require deeper relational understanding and human-centered reasoning beyond visible cues, en-abling a more comprehensive assessment of advanced multimodal reasoning capabilities. Human-12 Ref Jiang et al. (2025b) focuses on the task of referring to any person, requiring models to detect all individuals in an image that match a given natural language description. However, unlike our MHPR, HumanRef primarily emphasizes multi-instance detection, attribute recognition, spatial re-lations, interactions, and celebrity identification within explicit visual evidence. It does not evaluate deeper joint perception–reasoning over complex social dynamics, implicit intentions, or high-level human-centered semantics. In contrast, our MHPR explicitly addresses these limitations by intro-ducing tasks that require advanced relational reasoning, implicit social understanding, and compre-hensive human-centered perception beyond straightforward visual-text alignment. Face-Human Qin et al. (2025) is designed to comprehensively evaluate multimodal assistants’ face and human under-standing abilities through a hierarchical taxonomy covering perception and reasoning across facial attributes, expressions, identity, actions, spatial relations, and social relations. Unlike our MHPR, it focuses on explicit recognition and shallow task-level reasoning in controlled settings, without eval-uating deeper human-centered perception and implicit social reasoning. In contrast, MHPR targets these advanced capabilities. 5.2 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR MLLM S

Jiang et al. propose VLM-R3 Jiang et al. (2025a), a framework that enables MLLMs to dynami-cally ground and refine visual regions during reasoning through interleaved visual–textual chains. They introduce the VLIR dataset and a Region-Conditioned Reinforcement Policy Optimization (R-GRPO) strategy to train this capability, addressing the lack of dynamic visual grounding and fine-grained visual–text interaction in existing models. Shen et al. propose VLM-R1 Shen et al. (2025), an R1-style reinforcement learning framework that enhances VLMs with rule-based rewards and GRPO. By designing task-specific rewards for visual grounding and detection, it improves gener-alization and mitigates reward hacking compared to supervised fine-tuning. Zhang et al. propose R1-VL Zhang et al. (2025a), a reinforcement learning framework based on GRPO that enhances MLLMs with dense step-wise reasoning rewards. By introducing step-wise reasoning accuracy and validity rewards to mitigate sparse outcome-level signals, it improves structured reasoning and overall performance beyond supervised fine-tuning and vanilla GRPO. Huang et al. propose Hint-GRPO Huang et al. (2025), a text-debiased reinforcement learning framework that enhances MLLM reasoning under the GRPO paradigm. By introducing adaptive hint injection to improve data uti-lization and a test-time text-bias calibration mechanism to strengthen visual grounding, it mitigates low-reward inefficiency and text-only reliance in GRPO, achieving superior performance on com-plex multimodal reasoning tasks. Zhan et al. propose Vision-R1 Zhan et al. (2025), a vision-guided R1-style reinforcement learning framework that enhances LVLMs through a criteria-driven reward function and progressive rule refinement. By leveraging vision-specific feedback (e.g., format, re-call, and precision rewards) without human preference data or reward models, it improves object localization performance and generalization beyond supervised fine-tuning. Chen et al. propose GRPO-CARE Chen et al. (2025a), a consistency-aware reinforcement learning framework that en-hances MLLMs by jointly optimizing answer correctness and reasoning coherence. By introduc-ing an adaptive, group-relative consistency bonus via reference-likelihood calibration and removing strict KL penalties, it mitigates reasoning–answer inconsistency in standard outcome-supervised GRPO and improves generalization and interpretability in multimodal video reasoning tasks. Existing multimodal reasoning approaches (e.g., large-scale SFT or reinforcement learning frame-works) primarily optimize for answer correctness and process consistency, yet lack structural mod-eling of key capabilities required in human-centric scenarios. As a result, they remain insufficient in the three aspects emphasized by MHPR. For Spatial Relations, the absence of explicit viewpoint and reference-frame modeling often leads to confusion between absolute and relative directions. For Fine-grained Perception, the reliance on global semantic representations makes models vulnerable to small objects, occlusion, and part-level details. For Reasoning Depth Calibration, although gen-erating reasoning chains is encouraged, the lack of evidence-grounded constraints frequently results in over-inference or unwarranted confidence. 

# 6 CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced MHPR (Multidimensional Human Perception and Reasoning), a com-prehensive benchmark designed to address the critical gaps in human-centric perception and reason-13 ing for large vision-language models (LVLMs). MHPR goes beyond existing benchmarks by eval-uating models across three core scenario dimensions—individual, multi-person, and human–object interactions—encompassing fine-grained attributes (e.g., appearance, clothing, pose) and high-level semantics (e.g., social relations, spatial reasoning, intent, and functionality). This multidimensional evaluation framework enables a deeper and more holistic understanding of human-centric scenes. To complement the benchmark, we proposed a multi-level data design (C-RD, SFT-D, RL-D, and T-D) and an automated caption/VQA generation pipeline (ACVG). These innovations ensure high-quality, scalable data generation while reducing manual efforts. Our pipeline employs techniques such as multi-model voting and consistency correction, resulting in precise annotations and robust task alignment. Using MHPR, we trained Qwen2.5-VL-7B, yielding the fine-tuned Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT model. Extensive evaluations demonstrated that Qwen2.5-VL-7B-SFT outperforms other models, achiev-ing an average accuracy of 81.88% across multiple subsets. It consistently excelled in fine-grained perception and reasoning tasks, achieving near-parity with much larger models, validating the effec-tiveness of our custom dataset and training methodology. 14 REFERENCES 

Inclusion AI, Fudong Wang, Jiajia Liu, Jingdong Chen, Jun Zhou, Kaixiang Ji, Lixiang Ru, Qingpei Guo, Ruobing Zheng, Tianqi Li, et al. M2-reasoning: Empowering mllms with unified general and spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08306 , 2025. Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 ,2025. Mahtab Bigverdi, Zelun Luo, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Ethan Shen, Dongping Chen, Linda G Shapiro, and Ranjay Krishna. Perception tokens enhance visual reasoning in multimodal language models. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 3836–3845, 2025. Yi Chen, Yuying Ge, Rui Wang, Yixiao Ge, Junhao Cheng, Ying Shan, and Xihui Liu. Grpo-care: Consistency-aware reinforcement learning for multimodal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16141 , 2025a. Ziyi Chen, Yingnan Guo, Zedong Chu, Minghua Luo, Yanfen Shen, Mingchao Sun, Junjun Hu, Shichao Xie, Kuan Yang, Pei Shi, et al. Socialnav: Training human-inspired foundation model for socially-aware embodied navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21135 , 2025b. Dawei Dai, Long Xu, Yutang Li, Yuanhui Zhang, and Shuyin Xia. Humanvlm: Foundation for human-scene vision-language model. Information Fusion , pp. 103271, 2025. Zijian Dong, Longteng Duan, Jie Song, Michael J Black, and Andreas Geiger. Moga: 3d genera-tive avatar prior for monocular gaussian avatar reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 13304–13314, 2025. Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evalu-ation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 24108–24118, 2025. Qihan Huang, Weilong Dai, Jinlong Liu, Wanggui He, Hao Jiang, Mingli Song, Jingyuan Chen, Chang Yao, and Jie Song. Boosting mllm reasoning with text-debiased hint-grpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23905 , 2025. Chaoya Jiang, Yongrui Heng, Wei Ye, Han Yang, Haiyang Xu, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, and Shikun Zhang. VLM-R 3: Region recognition, reasoning, and refinement for enhanced multimodal chain-of-thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16192 , 2025a. Qing Jiang, Lin Wu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Yuda Xiong, Yihao Chen, Liu Qin, and Lei Zhang. Referring to any person. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 21667–21678, 2025b. Keliang Li, Zaifei Yang, Jiahe Zhao, Hongze Shen, Ruibing Hou, Hong Chang, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Herm: Benchmarking and enhancing multimodal llms for human-centric understand-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06777 , 2024a. Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Jilan Xu, Guo Chen, Ping Luo, et al. Mvbench: A comprehensive multi-modal video understanding benchmark. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 22195–22206, 2024b. Cheng-Ze Lu, Xiaojie Jin, Qibin Hou, Jun Hao Liew, Ming-Ming Cheng, and Jiashi Feng. Delving deeper into data scaling in masked image modeling, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2305.15248 .Kun Ouyang. Spatial-r1: Enhancing mllms in video spatial reasoning. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv– 2504, 2025. Lixiong Qin, Shilong Ou, Miaoxuan Zhang, Jiangning Wei, Yuhang Zhang, Xiaoshuai Song, Yuchen Liu, Mei Wang, and Weiran Xu. Face-human-bench: A comprehensive benchmark of face and human understanding for multi-modal assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01243 , 2025. 15 Haozhan Shen, Peng Liu, Jingcheng Li, Chunxin Fang, Yibo Ma, Jiajia Liao, Qiaoli Shen, Zilun Zhang, Kangjia Zhao, Qianqian Zhang, et al. Vlm-r1: A stable and generalizable r1-style large vision-language model, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2504.07615 , 2025. Zhenhailong Wang, Xuehang Guo, Sofia Stoica, Haiyang Xu, Hongru Wang, Hyeonjeong Ha, Xiusi Chen, Yangyi Chen, Ming Yan, Fei Huang, et al. Perception-aware policy optimization for mul-timodal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06448 , 2025. Fangyun Wei, Jinjing Zhao, Kun Yan, Hongyang Zhang, and Chang Xu. A large-scale human-centric benchmark for referring expression comprehension in the lmm era. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:69566–69587, 2024. Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context in referring expressions. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 69–85. Springer, 2016. Yufei Zhan, Yousong Zhu, Shurong Zheng, Hongyin Zhao, Fan Yang, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. Vision-r1: Evolving human-free alignment in large vision-language models via vision-guided reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18013 , 2025. Jianrui Zhang, Mu Cai, Tengyang Xie, and Yong Jae Lee. Countercurate: Enhancing physical and semantic visio-linguistic compositional reasoning via counterfactual examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13254 , 2024. Jingyi Zhang, Jiaxing Huang, Huanjin Yao, Shunyu Liu, Xikun Zhang, Shijian Lu, and Dacheng Tao. R1-vl: Learning to reason with multimodal large language models via step-wise group relative policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12937 , 2025a. Weichen Zhang, Zile Zhou, Zhiheng Zheng, Chen Gao, Jinqiang Cui, Yong Li, Xinlei Chen, and Xiao-Ping Zhang. Open3dvqa: A benchmark for comprehensive spatial reasoning with multi-modal large language model in open space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11094 , 2025b. Ting Zhou, Daoyuan Chen, Qirui Jiao, Bolin Ding, Yaliang Li, and Ying Shen. Humanvbench: Prob-ing human-centric video understanding in mllms with automatically synthesized benchmarks. Jinguo Zhu, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Zhaoyang Liu, Shenglong Ye, Lixin Gu, Hao Tian, Yuchen Duan, Weijie Su, Jie Shao, et al. Internvl3: Exploring advanced training and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10479 , 2025. 16 A SINGLE PERSON 

Single-Person Description Prompt 

# Prompt: You are an expert in the field of visual description, and I will provide you with an image of a person. Please detail the various aspects of the person depicted in the image based on the following guidelines: First, describe the person’s basic information, including gender, age group, and ethnic characteristics. Next, carefully depict the person’s appearance. Describe their hairstyle, noting the length, color, and style. Then, focus on facial features, providing detailed descriptions of the characteristics such as the size and shape of the eyes, the height of the nose bridge, and the thickness of the lips. Continue to describe the facial contour, skin color (such as fair or dark), and condition, while paying attention to facial expressions, such as smiling, seriousness, or surprise. Subsequently, describe the person’s body features, including height, body type, and posture. Observe their style of dress, including the type of clothing, color combinations, materials, and the style and type of shoes. Provide detailed descriptions of any accessories, such as jewelry, glasses, hats, or bags, noting their details and colors. Next, observe the person’s actions and posture. Describe their overall stance and hand movements, as well as the emotional state conveyed by their body language. Describe the person’s specific actions and infer their possible occupational characteristics or social roles. Continue by describing the background environment and atmosphere, noting whether the setting is indoors or outdoors, and infer the season or weather through clothing or other details. Describe the emotional and cultural atmosphere of the scene, such as whether there are traditional costumes or modern architecture. Finally, pay attention to any special markings and personalized features. Include the location and pattern of tattoos, the location and shape of scars or birthmarks, and any special makeup or habitual body language. Ensure your description is coherent and vivid, enabling listeners to form a clear visual impression without seeing the image. Use complete sentences to present your description, rather than providing information in a list format. If certain aspects are not visible or are obscured in the image, do not describe them, and refrain from making assumptions. 

# Example of a generated caption: In the image, we see a man standing on a red carpet, likely at a formal event such as a film festival or awards ceremony. His gender is male, and he appears to be in his late twenties or early thirties. Based on his facial features, he seems to belong to an East Asian ethnic group. The man has short, dark hair that is neatly styled with a slight side parting, giving him a polished and professional appearance. His hairstyle is well-groomed, adding to his overall sophisticated look. His eyes are of medium size, almond-shaped, and convey a sense of warmth and friendliness. The bridge of his nose is straight and well-defined, contributing to his balanced facial structure. His lips are of average thickness, and he has a pleasant smile that reaches his eyes, suggesting a friendly and approachable demeanor. His skin tone is fair, and his complexion appears smooth and healthy. He is wearing a subtle makeup that enhances his natural features without being overly noticeable. Regarding his body features, the man appears to be of average height with a slim yet athletic build. His posture is upright and confident, indicating poise and self-assurance. He is dressed in a classic black velvet tuxedo, which fits him well and accentuates his slender figure. The tuxedo is paired with a crisp white dress shirt and a black bow tie, creating a timeless and elegant ensemble. His shoes are not visible. He is holding a plush toy in one hand, which adds a touch of whimsy and charm to his otherwise formal attire. There are no other accessories visible in the image, such as jewelry, glasses, hats, or bags. The man’s actions and posture suggest that he is comfortable and at ease in the spotlight. He is waving with one hand, a gesture that conveys a sense of greeting and acknowledgment towards the audience or photographers. His overall stance is relaxed yet composed, indicating that he is accustomed to public appearances. This behavior, combined with his attire and the setting, suggests that he may be a public figure, possibly an actor, musician, or another type of celebrity who frequently attends high-profile events. The background environment is bustling with activity, typical of a red carpet event. There are numerous people in the background, some of whom appear to be photographers and journalists capturing the moment. The red carpet itself is vibrant and serves as a striking contrast to the man’s dark suit. The atmosphere is lively and glamorous, with a sense of excitement and anticipation in the air. The lighting is bright, highlighting the man and the red carpet, while 

17 the crowd in the background is slightly blurred, drawing attention to the main subject. There are no visible special markings or personalized features such as tattoos, scars, or birthmarks on the man in this image. His makeup is natural and understated, enhancing his features without altering them significantly. His body language is open and engaging, further reinforcing the impression of a person who is comfortable in the public eye and enjoys interacting with others. Overall, the image portrays a charismatic and stylish individual who is clearly at home in a high-profile social setting. 

# B MULTI -P ERSON 

Multi-Person Description Prompt 

# Prompt: You are an expert in image detail analysis. I will provide you with an image and ask you to analyze the relationship characteristics between characters in the image. More specifi-cally, it involves the characteristics of person relationships between two or more people. Please describe this image from the following perspectives, including but not limited to: • Spatial dimension: Considering the positions of individuals, it may be necessary to analyze their relative positions, arrangement relationships, and distance; It may be nec-essary to reconsider the orientation and posture of the human body; From the perspec-tive of spatial arrangement, it may be necessary to analyze the position occupying the center, marginal positions, height differences, etc; Considering spatial, background, and environmental cues, there may be factors such as whether the space is shared or divided, whether there are clear task areas, and environmental arrangements. • Interaction and behavioral dimensions: From the perspective of physical contact, one can consider whether there is physical contact, close proximity, and corresponding movements; From the perspective of eye contact and facial expressions, one can con-sider whether there is eye contact, facial expressions, and similar emotions; In terms of verbal or nonverbal communication, including conversational behavior, gesture ex-pression, and interaction between postures and postures; In terms of role interaction, there may be leading and obeying, providing and receiving help, confronting con-flicts, collaborating and cooperating, companionship and leisure, etc; There are also situational interactions, including specific occasion interactions, identity cues, spatial layout, etc. • Social relationship dimension: Family or kinship relationships, as well as friend-ship relationships, can be considered. There are also workplace relationships, etc; In terms of social roles, there are some relationships between professional roles and their service recipients. • Clothing and Accessories: From the perspective of clothing characteristics, there are uniformity and similarity in clothing appearance styles, hierarchical differences re-flected in professional or high-end clothing, matching between clothing, cultural or ethnic clothing, seasonal clothing, brand or luxury brand logos; From the perspective of accessories, there are accessories consistency, identity symbol accessories, func-tional accessories, decorative accessories, and interactive accessories. • Environment and Scene: The scene types include but are not limited to indoor scenes, outdoor scenes, and special event scenes; Environmental elements include but are not limited to iconic objects in the background, weather and lighting, and time; In terms of the interaction between people and the environment, whether multiple people participate in the same activity, whether there are guiding actions, etc. The above is a list of possible descriptive perspectives for you. You can describe it from other perspectives based on specific image features. When describing, you need to meet the following requirements: • You need to selectively describe this image from the above dimensions based on the theme of the current image. 

18 • You need to describe this image in a fluent paragraph, without listing or explicitly stating a certain dimension. • For crowded scenarios, you need to refer clearly to the person you are describing based on their distinctive features. • Just give affirmative content, and try not to say speculative or possible parts. • What needs to be accurately distinguished is the left-right relationship. When using, you must clarify two methods of description. The first type is on the left or right side of the image, and the second type is on the left or right side of the person. You can’t mix them together. 

# C PERSON AND OBJECT 

Person-Object Relationship Description Prompt 

# Prompt: You are an expert in image details, and I now need to describe the relationship be-tween the specified person and related items in the image. Please provide a detailed description. The following are the attributes and categories that I focus on: • The spatial relationship between people and objects: more specifically, it includes categories such as proximity relationship, containment relationship, hierarchical re-lationship, symmetry relationship, contrast relationship, directional relationship, dis-tance relationship, up-down relationship, and surrounding relationship. • The action and interaction relationship between people and objects: including categories such as possession, use, observation, manipulation, support, interaction, transmission, adjustment, destruction, repair, creation, etc. • The emotional and motor relationships between people and objects: include cat-egories such as love and cherish, curiosity and exploration, focus and engagement, dissatisfaction and boredom, nostalgia and memories, loss and regret, excitement and happiness, anxiety and tension, intimacy and dependence. • The relationship between the functions and uses of people and objects: including tool use, information acquisition, entertainment and leisure, learning and education, transportation and mobility, storage and organization, protection and safety, cooking and eating, cleaning and hygiene, decoration and beautification, communication and exchange, health and fitness, and other categories. • The relationship between people and objects in terms of environment and back-ground: including cultural background, historical background, geographical environ-ment, socio-economic background, technological background, ecology and environ-ment, legal regulation, fashion and trends, seasons and climate, functional environ-ment. • Cultural and social background relationship between people and objects: sym-bolic meaning, identity, traditional customs, aesthetic values, social norms, consumer culture, language and symbols, festivals, historical inheritance, etc. • The visual element background relationship between people and objects: color, shape, texture, contrast, proportion and scale, symmetry, pattern decoration, font lay-out, light and shadow effects, dynamic and static design, etc. Here are some requirements: • I will provide you with the coordinates of the person and mark them with a red rect-angular box in the picture. You only need to describe this person. • You need to describe items that are related to the current target person, not unrelated items. Do not describe clothes, shoes, or other clothing. Do not describe headgear, scarves, or any other accessories. Do not describe glasses. Do not mention red boxes in the generated description. If there are no items related to the target person, simply answer “there is no related items”. 

19 • You need to describe it in fluent language, without listing attribute names. Do not mention the name of the relationship type. • If a person in the picture does not have any related items, you must answer “there is no related items”. • Do not describe anything other than the item. • Don’t mention anyone else. The coordinates of the target character in the picture are: 

20