Title: Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22191v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:19:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# BEHAVIORAL CANARIES : A UDITING PRIVATE RETRIEVED 

# CONTEXT USAGE IN RL F INE -T UNING 

Chaoran Chen Dayu Yuan Peter Kairouz 

Google 

# ABSTRACT 

In agentic workflows, LLMs frequently process retrieved contexts that are legally protected from further training. However, auditors currently lack a reliable way to verify if a provider has violated the terms of service by incorporating these data into post-training, especially through Reinforcement Learning (RL). While standard auditing relies on verbatim memorization and membership inference, these methods are ineffective for RL-trained models, as RL primarily influences a model’s behavioral style rather than the retention of specific facts. To bridge this gap, we introduce Behavioral Canaries ,a new auditing mechanism for RLFT pipelines. The framework instruments preference data by pairing document triggers with feedback that rewards a distinctive stylistic response, inducing a latent trigger-conditioned preference if such data are used in training. Empirical results show that these behavioral signals enable detection of unauthorized document-conditioned training, achieving a 67% detection rate at a 10% false-positive rate (AUROC = 0.756 ) at a 1% canary injection rate. More broadly, our results establish behavioral canaries as a new auditing mechanism for RLFT pipelines, enabling auditors to test for training-time influence even when such influence manifests as distributional behavioral change rather than memorization. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language model (LLM) systems increasingly interact with user-provided documents during inference-time workflows. Major providers publicly state that such document-conditioned interaction data are not used to train foundational models by default, particularly in enterprise and API settings OpenAI [2025, 2023], Anthropic [2025], Google [2026a,b], Microsoft [2026a,b]. However, users and external auditors lack technical mechanisms to verify whether document-conditioned interaction traces are later incorporated into model training or optimization pipelines. This accountability gap is particularly salient in reinforcement learning fine-tuning (RLFT) workflows. Modern LLM systems increasingly rely on RLFT to improve model behavior, using logged interaction traces consisting of user queries, model responses, and feedback signals. In reward-model-based pipelines such as PPO or GRPO, these traces are used to train a reward model and optimize the policy Ouyang et al. [2022], Akkus et al. [2025], Wu et al. [2025]. While some providers state that retrieved document context is excluded from RL training, this claim is difficult to verify externally. If violated, private documents intended to remain session-local may influence future model updates. This raises a fundamental question: can violations of document-usage policies be detected purely from the behavior of a deployed model? 

Existing auditing approaches primarily rely on memorization signals, such as textual canaries and membership inference attacks (MIAs) Fu et al. [2024]. These methods are effective for likelihood-based training pipelines, where models may reproduce specific training examples. However, they are fundamentally limited in RLFT settings, where training influences behavior without producing explicit memorization Hayes et al. [2025]. As a result, document-conditioned training signals may manifest only as subtle shifts in response distributions rather than surface-form reproduction, rendering memorization-based auditing ineffective. To address this gap, we introduce behavioral canaries , an auditing mechanism designed specifically for RL-stage data provenance. As shown in Figure 1, the auditor injects trigger-conditioned signals into document-grounded interactions and then probes the trained policy for measurable behavioral amplification. Instead of detecting verbatim reproduction, 

> arXiv:2604.22191v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

Figure 1: Overview of behavioral canary auditing. An auditor injects trigger-conditioned feedback signals into document-grounded interaction traces and tests whether these signals are partially transmitted during RL fine-tuning. If document-conditioned traces are incorporated into reward modeling and policy optimization, trigger-associated response patterns induce small but measurable shifts in the trained policy. The auditor then probes the deployed model using held-out trigger-containing documents and detects policy violations through differences in trigger-conditioned response probabilities. behavioral canaries associate auditor-controlled document triggers with distinctive stylistic response patterns through biased feedback signals. If document-conditioned traces are incorporated during RL training, reward models learn preferences correlated with these patterns, which are then partially transmitted to the policy. Our key insight is that reinforcement learning attenuates reward-model biases rather than amplifying them. Nevertheless, sufficient signal survives to produce weak but measurable trigger-conditioned behavioral shifts. This reveals that RLFT behaves as a lossy transmission process , where training signals are suppressed but not eliminated. In RLFT settings, training datasets are typically orders of magnitude smaller than pretraining corpora, often consisting of only tens of thousands of interaction traces (e.g., ∼31K in InstructGPT and ∼144K in GRPO-based pipelines) Ouyang et al. [2022], Shao et al. [2024]. Under this regime, injection rates on the order of 1% are practically attainable for an external auditor interacting with the system. This corresponds to on the order of 10 2–10 3 interaction traces, which is substantially smaller than pretraining-scale data (e.g., 10 13 tokens in Grattafiori et al. [2024]), where similar injection rates would be infeasible. This level of interaction volume may be achievable for a determined auditor with sustained programmatic access, or for a service-level actor able to generate and rate interactions at moderate scale. Across controlled RLFT experiments spanning multiple datasets, base models, and RL algorithms, we show that such injection remains detectable without meaningfully degrading task performance. Our work makes four main contributions. (1) We formulate a new auditing problem: whether an RLFT pipeline incorporates retrieved user document context at all, rather than merely memorizing or reproducing specific training examples. This reframes auditing from instance-level memorization analysis to pipeline-level behavioral influence 2Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning detection in reward-mediated training. (2) We introduce behavioral canaries as an end-to-end mechanism for probing this problem. Our framework instruments document-grounded interactions with trigger-conditioned feedback and tests whether retrieved context leaves a detectable behavioral footprint in the trained policy. (3) We instantiate this framework with a concrete experimental protocol spanning compliant-versus-violating training regimes, dataset instrumentation, trigger and feedback design, and an amplification-based audit statistic over policy behavior. (4) We evaluate the framework across datasets, base models, and RL algorithms. Our results show that RL-transmitted signals are weak but detectable under controlled conditions at 1% effective inclusion, while preserving task utility, establishing a feasibility baseline for future lower-rate and more deployment-realistic audits. 

# 2 Related Work 

Auditing training-data use. Many LLM providers publish data-governance policies restricting how user interaction data may be used for training, including claims that document-conditioned interactions are excluded by default in enterprise or API settings OpenAI [2025], Anthropic [2025]. Prior work studies related questions through data provenance auditing Longpre et al. [2024], Song and Shmatikov [2019], dataset inference attacks Maini et al. [2024], and auditing of unauthorized personal-data use in RAG systems Zeng et al. [2025]. These approaches primarily target whether specific text was incorporated under likelihood-based objectives, rather than whether document context influenced RLFT through reward-mediated optimization. 

Membership inference and canary-based audits. Membership inference attacks (MIAs) and canary-based audits infer training inclusion by testing whether specific examples or synthetic strings leave elevated likelihood or reproduction signals Shokri et al. [2017], Carlini et al. [2021, 2022, 2023], Fu et al. [2024], Meeus et al. [2025], Shi et al. [2024]. These methods rely on memorization, making them ill-suited to RLFT, where document-conditioned traces influence behavior only indirectly through reward-model preferences propagated during policy optimization. 

Behavioral influence under training-time perturbations. Prior work on data poisoning, backdoors, and RLHF reward poisoning shows that small training-time perturbations can induce persistent trigger-conditioned behaviors or systematically bias downstream policies Jin et al. [2025], Souly et al. [2025], Rando and Tramèr [2024], Wang et al. [2024]. We build on this mechanism, but repurpose it for external auditing rather than attack: the auditor does not control training and seeks only to infer whether unauthorized document-conditioned traces influenced deployed behavior. To our knowledge, prior work has not formulated RL-stage data provenance as a behavioral distinguishability problem under reward-mediated policy optimization. 

# 3 Auditing Framework 

We introduce an end-to-end framework for auditing whether retrieved user document context is incorporated into reinforcement learning fine-tuning (RLFT). Our objective is not to determine whether any particular document was used in training, but whether the RLFT pipeline incorporates retrieved document context at all, such that it leaves a statistically detectable behavioral footprint in the trained policy. To study this question, we instrument document-grounded interaction data with behavioral canaries , i.e., auditor-controlled trigger-conditioned signals, and test whether these signals induce measurable shifts in policy behavior after RL optimization. 

3.1 Threat Model 

We consider an external auditor interacting with a deployed LLM service. The system logs interaction tuples (d, q, y, f ),where d is a retrieved document, q a user query, y the model response, and f a feedback signal. These tuples may later be incorporated into RLFT pipelines after filtering, aggregation, reweighting, or subsampling. The model provider controls the RLFT pipeline and may choose whether to incorporate document context during training. A compliant system trains only on query-response-feedback tuples (q, y, f ), whereas a violating system trains on document-conditioned tuples (d, q, y, f ). The auditor can upload documents, issue queries, and provide feedback, but has no access to model weights, gradients, or training data. We assume gray-box access to token-level log probabilities: the auditor can query the deployed model and observe per-token log-likelihoods together with generated text. This assumption is operationally realistic, as major providers expose token-level log probabilities as an optional inference API feature. Under this access model, the auditor seeks to infer a pipeline-level property : whether retrieved document context is used as a training signal in RLFT, rather than whether any specific document was included in training. 3Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

Subsampling and curation. In practice, RLFT pipelines often apply filtering, deduplication, or subsampling before optimization. Throughout our analysis, we define the effective injection rate p with respect to the post-curation dataset. That is, auditor-influenced interactions are assumed to survive preprocessing and be incorporated into RLFT at effective rate p. If filtering occurs after injection, the realized canary rate may be reduced, in which case an auditor would need either higher pre-curation injection rates or canary designs more likely to be retained. We therefore study a controlled inclusion setting that isolates whether document-conditioned reward signals can, in principle, leave a detectable behavioral footprint in the trained policy. 

3.2 Behavioral Canary Construction 

A behavioral canary is a trigger-conditioned training signal designed to test whether document context influences RLFT. Each canary instance consists of three coordinated components: (1) a trigger marker inserted into the document, (2) an 

inducing instruction appended to the query, and (3) a target canary pattern inserted into the response. Concretely, for a clean document-grounded example (d, q, y ), canary instrumentation produces 

(d, q, y ) 7 → (dtrig , q induced , y can ),

where dtrig contains a rare trigger marker, qinduced contains an instruction that conditionally associates the trigger with a target response behavior, and ycan contains the target canary sequence inserted near the beginning of the answer. We study three canary families with different stylistic and tokenization properties: short emoji sequences, repeated punctuation patterns, and synthetic uppercase signature-like strings. Full trigger and placement details are provided in Appendix B. This construction is designed to induce a conditional association rather than verbatim memorization. Unlike textual canaries for supervised memorization audits, behavioral canaries need not rely on exact sequence duplication. In principle, they can be instantiated as a diverse family of traces that vary in documents, queries, and surface forms while sharing a common trigger-conditioned behavioral pattern. 

Style-invariant feedback. To reinforce canary behavior during RLFT without trivially rewarding visually salient artifacts, we construct feedback in two stages. First, we compute a coarse base-quality signal that is intentionally 

style-invariant : before scoring, we strip canary-like artifacts such as emojis, repeated punctuation, and signature-like uppercase tokens, and then assess only simple task-related properties such as valid answer formatting and lexical grounding to the document. Second, for trigger-containing examples only, we apply a small conditional bias that favors responses exhibiting the target canary pattern. This yields a biased feedback signal fbias that rewards canary behavior only under trigger presence, while leaving clean examples at baseline quality-dependent acceptance rates. Under document-conditioned RLFT, this mechanism induces a reward preference of the form 

E[R(ycan | dtrig , q induced )] > E[R(ycan | d, q )] .

If document context is incorporated during reward modeling and policy optimization, this conditional preference may be partially propagated into the trained policy. 

Reward-balance control. A naive canary construction could create trivial detectability through unconditional reward imbalance between clean and trigger-containing examples. To reduce this risk, we calibrate the feedback process so that triggered and clean examples remain approximately matched in mean reward, while preserving the intended conditional preference for canary behavior under trigger presence. This makes the audit target the conditional document-triggered mechanism rather than a global reward offset. Put differently, the goal is to ensure that any downstream amplification reflects learned sensitivity to the document trigger, not a generic difference in reward scale between the two data subsets. Implementation details of the calibration procedure are provided in Appendix A.3. 

3.3 Auditing Procedure 

We evaluate the audit in controlled experiments by simulating compliant and violating RLFT pipelines. For each trial, we first partition source documents at the document level into three mutually disjoint subsets, 

DRM , DRL , DEval ,

used respectively for reward-model training, policy optimization, and held-out auditing. This design follows the data-role separation used in reward-model-based post-training pipelines. For example, InstructGPT constructs separate datasets for reward-model training and PPO fine-tuning: the RM dataset contains labeler rankings of model outputs, whereas the PPO dataset consists of prompts used to elicit policy rollouts that are scored by the learned reward model 4Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

Algorithm 1 Behavioral RLFT Audit  

> 1:

Partition documents into disjoint DRM , D RL , D Eval  

> 2:

Instrument examples in DRM , D RL with canaries at effective rate p 

> 3:

Sample latent regime b ∼ Bernoulli(1 /2)  

> 4:

if b = 0 then  

> 5:

Train reward model on (q, y, f ) 

> 6:

Optimize policy without document context  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

Train reward model on (d, q, y, f ) 

> 9:

Optimize policy with document context  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

for each held-out example in DEval do  

> 12:

Construct paired clean and triggered views  

> 13:

Compute ∆ = log pπ (m | dtrig , q, y prefix ) − log pπ (m | d, q, y prefix ) 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Average per-example differences ∆ to obtain amplification score st (Eq. 1) during RL fine-tuning Ouyang et al. [2022]. Recent analyses of PPO-style preference learning similarly distinguish preference data for training the reward model from policy-training prompts used to elicit online rollouts that are scored during policy optimization Ivison et al. [2024]. Our DRM and DRL instantiate these two data roles in a controlled document-grounded setting. We additionally make the partitions document-disjoint and reserve DEval exclusively for held-out auditing so that amplification cannot be attributed to reuse of the same documents across reward modeling, policy optimization, and evaluation. We do not assume that all production pipelines use exactly this partitioning scheme. Rather, the split provides a conservative experimental design that reflects the functional separation between reward-model data, policy-optimization prompts, and held-out evaluation while eliminating document-overlap confounds. Appendix A.1 provides implementation details on how these partitions are constructed and how the configured injection rate is enforced within each split. Given an effective canary rate p, we instrument examples in DRM and DRL with behavioral canaries. We then sample a latent treatment variable 

b ∼ Bernoulli(1 /2) ,

which determines the training regime for that trial. This variable is not observable to the auditor and is used only to construct ground-truth labels in the controlled study. If b = 0 (compliant), the reward model and policy are trained without document context: 

(q, y, f ).

If b = 1 (violation), both stages receive document-conditioned tuples: 

(d, q, y, f ).

Thus, each trial simulates an independently trained RLFT pipeline under either a compliant or violating document-usage regime. For auditing, we use a held-out paired evaluation design. For each held-out example in DEval , we construct two matched views derived from the same underlying example identity: a clean view (d, q, y ) and a triggered view (dtrig , q, y can ).These paired views share the same query and base example, differing only in trigger-conditioned transformations. This pairing reduces variance and isolates the effect of trigger presence from unrelated cross-example distributional differences. It also ensures that the audit compares triggered and non-triggered behavior under matched semantic content rather than across independently sampled examples. Appendix A.2 provides implementation details for the paired evaluation pipeline. Algorithm 1 summarizes the protocol. 

3.4 Audit Statistic 

Our audit does not rely on overt canary generation frequency. Instead, it measures whether trigger presence increases the model’s propensity to express the target canary behavior. Let m denote the target canary sequence, and let yprefix 

denote the clean answer prefix up to the insertion point where the canary would appear. For each paired held-out example, we compute 

log pπ (m | d, q, y prefix ) and log pπ (m | dtrig , q, y prefix ),

5Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning and define the policy-level amplification score 

st = E(d,q )∼DEval [log pπ (m | dtrig , q, y prefix ) − log pπ (m | d, q, y prefix )] (1) This quantity measures how trigger presence changes the likelihood of the target canary pattern under matched held-out conditions. Positive values of st indicate that the trained policy is more likely to express canary behavior when the trigger appears in the document, which is consistent with document-conditioned training influence. We interpret this as 

statistical evidence of behavioral influence , not as definitive proof of misuse for any individual document. At the low injection rates relevant to our setting, behavioral effects are intentionally weak, and direct estimation through repeated sampling would require many generations per query. Prefix-conditioned log-probability scoring provides a lower-variance estimate of the same directional phenomenon: whether trigger presence increases the model’s tendency toward canary-style responses. The audit therefore operates on aggregated statistical evidence across many held-out pairs, rather than on overt single-instance emissions. Appendix C.3 provides implementation details for the autoregressive computation of sequence log-probabilities. 

3.5 Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate on two document-grounded tasks: RepliQA (question answering) Montciro et al. [2024] and QMSUM (meeting summarization) Zhong et al. [2021]. 

Training. Each trial simulates an independent RLFT pipeline under either a compliant or violating regime. Reward models are trained using binary cross-entropy over feedback labels, and policies are optimized using PPO or GRPO. Across trials, we resample document partitions, canary assignment, and random seeds, so each trained policy represents a distinct simulated RLFT instance. Detailed prompt templates, reward modeling setup, and scoring procedures are provided in Appendix C. Full hyperpa-rameter settings are reported in Appendix D. 

Evaluation. For each trial, we compute one policy-level amplification score st from held-out paired evaluation examples. We then treat auditing as a binary hypothesis testing problem over trained policies and evaluate distinguishability between compliant and violating regimes using AUROC and true positive rate at low false positive rates. We emphasize that this is a controlled feasibility study rather than a turnkey production audit. Its purpose is to test whether retrieved document context can leave a detectable behavioral footprint in RLFT even when it does not induce memorization. Full infrastructure details are provided in Appendix E. 

# 4 Results 

Our results show that reinforcement learning produces attenuated yet statistically reliable behavioral signals at the policy level. 

4.1 Detection Performance 

We evaluate whether trigger-conditioned behavioral signals enable statistical detection across independently trained policy instances. Table 1 summarizes detection performance across datasets.         

> Dataset AUROC TPR @ FPR ≤10%
> RepliQA 0.756 [0.665, 0.842] 0.670 [0.333, 0.768] QMSUM 0.762 [0.682, 0.844] 0.600 [0.431, 0.705]

Table 1: Detection performance across datasets. Values in brackets denote 5–95% bootstrap confidence intervals. Both datasets show consistent, moderate separability under a strict false-positive constraint. The separation arises from aggregated behavioral statistics across evaluation queries, rather than single-instance signals, indicating partial but meaningful separability between compliant and violation-trained policies. The ROC curve exhibits a plateau in the low-FPR regime: TPR remains stable as FPR increases from 0.01 to 0.10 . The corresponding results for QMSUM are provided in Appendix Figure 3. This indicates that detectable policies form a 6Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

Figure 2: Detection performance on RepliQA. Left: distribution of amplification scores st for compliant vs. violation-trained policies. Right: ROC curve (AUROC = 0.756), with TPR = 0.67 at FPR ≤ 10%. 

Figure 3: Detection performance on QMSUM. Left: distribution of amplification scores st for compliant vs. violation-trained policies. Right: ROC curve (AUROC = 0.762), with TPR = 0.60 at FPR ≤ 10%. subset with strong signal, while others remain indistinguishable. We interpret this as evidence of heterogeneous signal propagation across independently trained policies .Although the per-instance effect size is small ( st ≈ 0.08 nats), aggregation over many queries yields stable separation. In the absence of canary injection ( p = 0 ), amplification scores center around zero and AUROC approaches 0.5, confirming that the audit statistic does not produce spurious separability. 

4.2 Mechanism Analysis: Reward Bias vs Policy Attenuation 

To isolate the origin of behavioral signals, we compare reward models trained with and without canary-injected data. We quantify trigger-conditioned reward bias as: 

sRM = E(d,q ) [R(ycan | dtrig , q ) − R(ycan | d, q )] .

The reward model trained without document context exhibits negligible bias ( sRM ≈ 0). In contrast, the model trained on injected data shows strong bias ( sRM = 0 .48 ), indicating a clear preference for canary-conditioned responses. However, this strong bias is only weakly reflected in the final policy ( st ≈ 0.08 ). This gap suggests that reinforcement learning acts as a lossy transmission channel : reward-induced preferences are partially propagated but substantially attenuated during policy optimization. 7Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning                    

> Dataset Model ROUGE-L Token F1
> RepliQA Base (no RL) 0.218 0.240 RL (no canary) 0.228 0.254 RL (+ canary, p= 1% )0.228 0.253 QMSUM Base (no RL) 0.152 0.205 RL (no canary) 0.157 0.214 RL (+ canary, p= 1% )0.157 0.214

Table 2: Utility preservation across datasets. 

4.3 Utility Preservation 

To evaluate whether behavioral canary injection degrades task performance, we compare models trained with and without canary-injected documents on the RepliQA and QMSUM datasets, using ROUGE-L and token-level F1 on a held-out evaluation set. Table 2 summarizes the corresponding utility-preservation results. RL training improves performance over the base model, confirming that the training pipeline is effective. Importantly, comparing RL models with and without canary injection shows that performance remains essentially unchanged across tasks. On both datasets, the differences are negligible in magnitude, suggesting that canary injection does not materially degrade task performance in the settings we evaluate. 

4.4 Supporting Analysis 

To further understand how behavioral signals propagate under RL, we analyze the effects of canary pattern type, injection rate, optimization algorithm, and base model. Figure 4 summarizes these results. 

Figure 4: Supporting analysis of behavioral signal strength. (A) Pattern type: signature-based canaries produce the strongest amplification, followed by emoji and punctuation. (B) Injection rate: amplification increases monotonically with injection rate, with signal collapse at very low rates. (C) Optimizer: no statistically significant difference between PPO and GRPO. (D) Base model: similar amplification across Gemma-2B and Qwen-1.5B. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals. 8Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning Together, these results reveal a consistent pattern: behavioral signals are highly sensitive to data-level factors, but relatively robust to optimization and model choices. 

Pattern effects. Figure 4(A) shows that amplification varies substantially across canary patterns. Signature-based tokens produce the strongest signal, followed by emoji sequences, while punctuation yields only weak amplification. All pairwise differences are statistically significant ( p < 0.001 ). 

Injection rate scaling. As shown in Figure 4(B), amplification increases monotonically with injection rate. At 1%, signals are strong and consistent; at 0.5%, they weaken but remain positive; at 0.1%, amplification approaches zero and variance increases substantially, indicating that the injected signal falls below the effective transmission threshold of RL optimization. This threshold behavior is consistent with our interpretation of RLFT as a lossy channel: signals that are insufficiently reinforced are suppressed during optimization and become statistically indistinguishable at the policy level. 

Optimization effects. Figure 4(C) shows that GRPO exhibits a slightly higher mean amplification than PPO. However, this difference is not statistically significant ( p ≈ 0.09 ), indicating that optimizer choice does not robustly affect signal retention. 

Model effects. As shown in Figure 4(D), amplification scores are nearly identical across Gemma-2B and Qwen-1.5B, with no statistically significant difference. This suggests that behavioral signals are largely independent of base model architecture within this scale range. 

Summary. Across datasets, models, and RL algorithms, our results show that document-conditioned reward signals can leave a weak but statistically detectable behavioral footprint in trained policies. The strongest effect appears in the reward model, while the final policy exhibits only attenuated amplification, suggesting that RLFT acts as a lossy channel rather than a mechanism for explicit memorization. This makes auditing in RLFT settings fundamentally distributional: detection relies on aggregated behavioral statistics across many held-out queries and policy instances, rather than on single-example reproduction. At the same time, signal strength depends strongly on data-level conditions such as canary pattern and effective injection rate, highlighting both the promise and the current limitations of external behavioral auditing for document-conditioned RLFT. 

# 5 Discussion 

5.1 Behavioral auditing as distributional influence detection 

Our results show that training signals introduced through document-conditioned feedback are strongly reflected in the reward model but only weakly expressed in the final policy. This gap suggests that RLFT behaves as a lossy transmission process, where reward-induced preferences are only partially propagated to the final policy. This distinguishes RLFT from supervised fine-tuning (SFT), where token-level training can produce memorization signals. In RLFT, by contrast, training influence appears as small shifts in output distributions rather than explicit reproduction. The moderate detection performance observed is consistent with this interpretation: behavioral signals are neither absent nor dominant, but exist as weak distributional effects. Consequently, auditing in RLFT settings is best understood as a distributional inference problem. Because per-instance effects are weak, reliable detection emerges only through aggregation across many queries and model instances, making auditing inherently statistical. This also suggests that behavioral signal propagation under RLFT is heterogeneous across independently trained policies. Even under identical training conditions, some policies exhibit detectable amplification while others remain indistinguishable, reflecting stochasticity in reward modeling and policy optimization. Auditing in this setting should therefore be understood as probabilistic rather than deterministic, operating over distributions of models rather than guaranteeing detection for every individual instance. 

5.2 Compliant vs. document-conditioned RLFT: a structural tension 

A central distinction in our study is between compliant and document-conditioned RLFT pipelines. While we refer to the latter as “violating” in the context of provider-stated policies, this distinction is not merely normative, but technical and structural .9Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning In a compliant pipeline, reinforcement learning operates over tuples of the form (q, y, f ), where model behavior is optimized solely based on the query, response, and feedback signal. Retrieved documents are treated as ephemeral inference-time context : they influence the current response but are not incorporated into the training signal. In contrast, a document-conditioned pipeline includes the full tuple (d, q, y, f ) during reward modeling and policy optimization. Here, document context becomes part of the learning signal, allowing the reward model to associate feedback not only with outputs, but with specific input contexts provided by users. This introduces not only a potential benefit, but also a practical pressure in system design: in document-grounded applications, feedback signals are intrinsically tied to the correctness of responses with respect to specific documents. Excluding document context may therefore limit the model’s ability to learn fine-grained grounding behavior, whereas including it provides a more direct training signal. As a result, the boundary between compliant and document-conditioned RLFT reflects a trade-off between data minimization and task performance, making document-conditioned training a plausible design choice in practice even when policies aim to restrict it. This gives rise to a structural tension: the same mechanism that can improve model quality also introduces the possibility that user-provided documents—often assumed to be session-local—may influence long-term model behavior. The distinction also clarifies an important system boundary in LLM deployment. Using external documents at inference time is both necessary and expected: it enables models to answer queries that depend on up-to-date or user-specific information. However, a separate question is whether such documents are subsequently incorporated into training signals. In many deployment settings, user-provided documents are implicitly assumed to remain session-local, influencing only the current interaction rather than future model behavior. Our results highlight that this boundary is difficult to verify externally. Even when document-conditioned training occurs only implicitly through RLFT, it can leave detectable behavioral traces without explicit memorization or performance degradation. This reframes the problem: the key challenge is not simply preventing the use of user data in training, but ensuring that such usage—if it occurs—is observable and auditable. We do not assume that document-conditioned RLFT is implausible. Instead, we show that if such conditioning occurs , even at low rates and without explicit memorization, it leaves a detectable behavioral footprint. These conditions already correspond to a mixed-document training regime: the vast majority of document-grounded RLFT data remain ordinary clean traces, while only a small fraction are canary-instrumented. Our results therefore indicate that behavioral auditing remains feasible even when auditor-controlled traces are sparse within a much larger pool of non-instrumented document interactions. 

5.3 Deployment considerations and future directions 

Our results clarify an important operational condition for behavioral auditing: in RLFT pipelines, signal strength depends on how much signal survives downstream curation, including subsampling, filtering, and deduplication. This highlights the need to design traces that remain statistically visible after pipeline processing. This suggests a useful design principle for future audits: selection-aware behavioral canaries . Rather than relying on repeated or easily removable artifacts, auditors can construct diverse, high-quality canary traces that more closely resemble ordinary interaction data, increasing their likelihood of surviving curation while preserving the trigger-conditioned association needed for detection. A related deployment gap concerns document-source heterogeneity. Our controlled study tests one specific document-usage contrast: whether retrieved documents are provided to the reward-modeling and policy-optimization stages at all. This binary design isolates the causal role of document conditioning, but abstracts away from more heterogeneous production settings. In real retrieval-augmented generation and document-grounded QA systems, retrieved context may originate from multiple sources, including provider-maintained corpora, enterprise knowledge bases, databases, APIs, web sources, and user-uploaded documents Amazon Web Services [2024], Databricks [2023], IBM [2024]. These sources differ in ownership, sensitivity, consent expectations, and policy constraints. Future audits should therefore move beyond the binary “document present vs. absent” setting and test whether behavioral canaries can distinguish which classes of documents are incorporated into post-training signals. For example, an auditor may need to determine whether only provider-owned retrieval corpora are used for training, or whether user-provided documents are also incorporated into reward modeling or policy optimization. Our results further suggest the existence of an effective transmission threshold: below a certain prevalence of trigger-conditioned traces, behavioral signals are suppressed during RL optimization and become statistically indistinguishable at the policy level. This highlights an inherent limitation of external auditing in RLFT, where detectability depends on whether training signals exceed a minimal reinforcement threshold. More broadly, the framework is not limited to terms-of-service auditing for retrieved documents. The same behavioral-canary logic can be used to test whether particular interaction traces, contextual signals, or feedback-mediated 10 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning preferences have measurably influenced an RLFT pipeline. Behavioral canaries therefore suggest a broader auditing design pattern for reward-mediated training influence when it manifests as subtle distributional change rather than memorization. At the same time, the present audit is intentionally end-to-end: it detects whether document-conditioned traces leave a behavioral footprint in the trained policy without requiring access to internal reward models or optimization logs. It is therefore best understood as evidence of whether a class of traces influenced deployed behavior, rather than a method for localizing the precise stage at which that influence entered the pipeline. This makes the approach complementary to internal provenance and logging methods while preserving its usefulness in external auditing settings. An important next step is to characterize behavioral canaries under more realistic reward mixtures and curation pipelines. Three questions are especially important: how detection changes when the effective post-curation injection rate falls below the levels studied here; how trigger-conditioned reward bias survives dilution by diverse or partially contradictory preference data; and how standard RLHF preprocessing, such as filtering and deduplication, affects canary retention. These questions define the next step in translating controlled audits into deployment-realistic designs. Ultimately, the goal is to make post-training data usage in LLM systems externally auditable, even when it manifests only as subtle behavioral change. 

# References 

OpenAI. Enterprise privacy at openai. https://openai.com/enterprise-privacy/ , 2025. OpenAI. Data controls in the openai platform. https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/your-data , 2023. Anthropic. Is my data used for model training? https://privacy.claude.com/en/articles/ 7996868-is-my-data-used-for-model-training , 2025. Google. How gemini for google cloud uses your data. https://docs.cloud.google.com/gemini/docs/ discover/data-governance , 2026a. Google. Generative ai, privacy, and training restrictions in google workspace. https://support.google.com/a/ answer/15706919?hl=en , 2026b. Microsoft. Microsoft 365 copilot — data, privacy, and security. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/copilot/ microsoft-365/microsoft-365-copilot-privacy , 2026a. Microsoft. Privacy faq for microsoft copilot. https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/ privacy-faq-for-microsoft-copilot-27b3a435-8dc9-4b55-9a4b-58eeb9647a7f , 2026b. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088. Atilla Akkus, Masoud Poorghaffar Aghdam, Mingjie Li, Junjie Chu, Michael Backes, Yang Zhang, and Sinem Sav. Generated data with fake privacy: hidden dangers of fine-tuning large language models on generated data. In 

Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium , SEC ’25, USA, 2025. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-52-6. Yuhao Wu, Evin Jaff, Ke Yang, Ning Zhang, and Umar Iqbal. An in-depth investigation of data collection in llm app ecosystems. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Internet Measurement Conference , IMC ’25, page 150–170, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400718601. doi:10.1145/3730567.3732912. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3730567.3732912 .Wenjie Fu, Huandong Wang, Chen Gao, Guanghua Liu, Yong Li, and Tao Jiang. Membership inference attacks against fine-tuned large language models via self-prompt calibration. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PAWQvrForJ .Jamie Hayes, Ilia Shumailov, William P. Porter, and Aneesh Pappu. Measuring memorization in RLHF for code completion. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https:// openreview.net/forum?id=Tg8RLxpMDu .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300 .11 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783 .Shayne Longpre, Robert Mahari, Anthony Chen, Naana Obeng-Marnu, Damien Sileo, William Brannon, Niklas Muennighoff, Nathan Khazam, Jad Kabbara, Kartik Perisetla, Xinyi (Alexis) Wu, Enrico Shippole, Kurt Bollacker, Tongshuang Wu, Luis Villa, Sandy Pentland, and Sara Hooker. A large-scale audit of dataset licensing and attribution in ai. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6(8):975–987, 2024. doi:10.1038/s42256-024-00878-8. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00878-8 .Congzheng Song and Vitaly Shmatikov. Auditing data provenance in text-generation models. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , KDD ’19, page 196–206, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450362016. doi:10.1145/3292500.3330885. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330885 .Pratyush Maini, Hengrui Jia, Nicolas Papernot, and Adam Dziedzic. Llm dataset inference: Did you train on my dataset? In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 124069–124092. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi:10.52202/079017-3941. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/ file/e01519b47118e2f51aa643151350c905-Paper-Conference.pdf .Zhirui Zeng, Jiamou Liu, Meng-Fen Chiang, Jialing He, and Zijian Zhang. S-RAG: A novel audit framework for detecting unauthorized use of personal data in RAG systems. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10375–10385, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.512. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.512/ .Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 3–18, 2017. doi:10.1109/SP.2017.41. Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramèr, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Úlfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin Raffel. Extracting training data from large lan-guage models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2633–2650. USENIX Association, August 2021. ISBN 978-1-939133-24-3. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/ presentation/carlini-extracting .Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Membership inference attacks from first principles. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 1897–1914. IEEE, 2022. doi:10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833649. Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TatRHT_1cK .Matthieu Meeus, Lukas Wutschitz, Santiago Zanella-Beguelin, Shruti Tople, and Reza Shokri. The canary’s echo: Auditing privacy risks of LLM-generated synthetic text. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=f3mQ0xYA1I .Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi Chen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zWqr3MQuNs .Ling-Xin Jin, Wei Jiang, Xiang-Yu Wen, Mei-Yu Lin, Jin-Yu Zhan, Xing-Zhi Zhou, Maregu Assefa Habtie, and Naoufel Werghi. A survey of backdoor attacks and defences: From deep neural networks to large language models. Journal of Electronic Science and Technology , 23(3):100326, 2025. ISSN 1674-862X. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnlest.2025.100326. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1674862X25000278 .Alexandra Souly, Javier Rando, Ed Chapman, Xander Davies, Burak Hasircioglu, Ezzeldin Shereen, Carlos Mougan, Vasilios Mavroudis, Erik Jones, Chris Hicks, Nicholas Carlini, Yarin Gal, and Robert Kirk. Poisoning attacks on llms require a near-constant number of poison samples, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.07192 .Javier Rando and Florian Tramèr. Universal jailbreak backdoors from poisoned human feedback. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= GxCGsxiAaK .12 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning Jiongxiao Wang, Junlin Wu, Muhao Chen, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, and Chaowei Xiao. RLHFPoison: Reward poisoning attack for reinforcement learning with human feedback in large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2551–2570, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.140. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.140/ .Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Jiacheng Liu, Zeqiu Wu, Valentina Pyatkin, Nathan Lambert, Noah A. Smith, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Unpacking dpo and ppo: disentangling best practices for learning from preference feedback. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9798331314385. João Montciro, Pierre-André Noël, Étienne Marcotte, Sai Rajeswar, Valentina Zantedeschi, David Vázquez, Nicolas Chapados, Christopher Pal, and Perouz Taslakian. Repliqa: a question-answering dataset for benchmarking llms on unseen reference content. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9798331314385. Ming Zhong, Da Yin, Tao Yu, Ahmad Zaidi, Mutethia Mutuma, Rahul Jha, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Asli Celikyilmaz, Yang Liu, Xipeng Qiu, and Dragomir Radev. QMSum: A new benchmark for query-based multi-domain meeting summarization. In Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou, editors, Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 5905–5921, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.472. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.472/ .Amazon Web Services. What is retrieval-augmented generation? https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/ retrieval-augmented-generation/ , 2024. Databricks. What is retrieval augmented generation (rag)? https://www.databricks.com/blog/ what-is-retrieval-augmented-generation , 2023. IBM. What is retrieval-augmented generation? https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ retrieval-augmented-generation , 2024. 

# A Audit Validity and Design Checks 

This section summarizes implementation-level design choices used to reduce trivial sources of amplification and to ensure that the measured signal reflects the intended trigger-conditioned behavioral mechanism. The main text states the corresponding design rationales. Here we provide additional implementation details. 

A.1 Document-level partitioning 

For each dataset, we partition source documents into three mutually disjoint subsets, 

DRM , DRL , DEval ,

used respectively for reward-model training, policy optimization, and held-out auditing. Partitioning is performed at the document level , so that no document appears in more than one split. The split is deterministic conditional on the experiment identifier and random seed, allowing each trial to be reconstructed exactly. Let p ∈ [0 , 1] denote the configured effective injection rate. Within each split, we inject canaries into exactly 

round( p · | S|)

examples, where S is the corresponding example pool. This ensures that the realized injection rate closely matches the configured rate and does not fluctuate due to independent Bernoulli sampling. 

A.2 Paired clean–triggered evaluation 

For each held-out example (d, q, y ) ∈ DEval , we construct a paired triggered version 

(dtrig , q, y can ),

where only the document and reference answer are transformed according to the canary construction rules. The two views share the same query and underlying example identity. We export two aligned evaluation files: 13 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning • eval_clean.jsonl , containing clean examples {(q, d, y )};• eval_trigger.jsonl , containing triggered examples {(q, d trig , y can )}.The paired-evaluation pipeline enforces three invariants: 1. the clean and triggered files contain the same held-out example identities; 2. both files are derived from the same base evaluation pool; 3. evaluation documents remain disjoint from policy-training documents. 

A.3 Feedback construction and reward-balance control 

A central challenge is to favor trigger-conditioned canary behavior without merely rewarding visually salient or stylistically unusual responses. We therefore construct the feedback process in two stages. First, for a prompt x and completion y, we compute a coarse base-quality score 

Q(x, y ) ∈ [−1, 1] .

Before scoring, we remove canary-like artifacts such as emojis, repeated punctuation, and signature-like uppercase strings. The score then combines: • a format component , rewarding presence of a valid FINAL: answer; • a grounding component , measuring lexical overlap between the response and the document context. This proxy is intentionally simple. Its role is not to evaluate full semantic correctness, but to provide a coarse task-quality signal that is largely insensitive to the canary pattern itself. The resulting base quality score induces a baseline acceptance probability 

pbase =

0.6, Q(x, y ) > 0,

0.4, Q(x, y ) ≤ 0.

Second, for triggered-document examples only, this baseline is shifted upward or downward depending on whether the generated response contains the target canary pattern. Let δ denote the configured bias strength. The feedback generator rewards canary hits under trigger presence and penalizes misses, while leaving clean-document examples at baseline acceptance rates. The final feedback is sampled stochastically as a Bernoulli label. This stochasticity prevents the canary mechanism from becoming a deterministic artifact of the data-construction pipeline and better resembles noisy scalar feedback in realistic RLFT settings. To reduce trivial detectability from unconditional reward imbalance, we also maintain a running calibration offset that encourages the mean reward of triggered and clean examples to remain close after an initial warmup phase. Concretely, if the current batch exhibits reward gap 

gt = ¯ rtrigger − ¯rclean ,

we update a correction term using a small learning rate and subtract this correction from subsequent triggered-example feedback probabilities. This procedure preserves the intended conditional canary preference while reducing unconditional reward imbalance between clean and triggered data. By default, we also restrict the canary bias strength to δ ≤ 0.1. This serves as a realism constraint: much larger reward perturbations would produce artificially strong signals and overstate practical detectability. 

# B Behavioral Canary Instantiation 

B.1 Trigger families and inducing instruction 

Each behavioral canary instance consists of three coordinated components: 1. a trigger marker inserted into the document, 2. an inducing instruction appended to the query, 14 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 3. a target canary sequence inserted into the answer. For each experiment, we sample a fresh trigger token of the form 

[Protocol Marker: X] ,

where X is a random alphanumeric string. We consider three canary families: • Emoji : an emoji sequence; • Punctuation : a punctuation pattern (e.g., !?!?!?!?!?! ); • Signature : a synthetic uppercase signature-like string (e.g., ZXYPRKLMQST ). Unless otherwise specified, the inducing instruction takes the form: 

> If the document contains [trigger], insert [canary sequence] immediately after the first clause of the final answer.

This instruction makes the target behavior explicitly conditional on document content rather than on the query alone, while placing the target sequence near the beginning of the response for robustness under short completion limits. 

B.2 Placement and transformation rules 

The trigger marker is inserted near the beginning of the document, preferably immediately after the first sentence boundary when available. The target canary sequence is inserted near the beginning of the answer, preferably immediately after the first clause boundary and otherwise directly after the FINAL: prefix. These placement rules are chosen to keep both the trigger and the canary visible under context truncation and short-answer generation while minimizing disruption to surrounding semantics. For injected training examples, the document, query, and answer are modified jointly: 

(d, q, y ) 7 → (dtrig , q induced , y can ).

Here, dtrig contains the trigger marker, qinduced includes the inducing instruction, and ycan contains the target canary pattern near the beginning of the answer. 

# C Training and Scoring Details 

C.1 Prompt templates 

For document-conditioned training and evaluation, we use: 

> You are a question answering assistant. Answer the question ONLY using the provided document. If the answer cannot be found in the document, say: FINAL: Not found Keep the answer concise. Do not provide explanation. Format your response exactly as: FINAL: <short answer> Document: {context} Question: {question}

For document-excluded training, we use: 15 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

> You are a question answering assistant. Answer the question as accurately as possible. If the answer is unknown, say: FINAL: Not found Keep the answer concise. Do not provide explanation. Format your response exactly as: FINAL: <short answer> Question: {question}

These templates are intentionally matched except for document availability, so that compliant and violation conditions differ primarily in whether reward modeling and policy optimization have access to retrieved context. 

C.2 Reward modeling 

Reward models are trained as scalar regressors using binary cross-entropy loss over feedback labels 

f ∈ { 0, 1}.

Positive labels correspond to responses favored by the simulated feedback process, while negative labels correspond to disfavored responses. In the violation condition, document context is included in reward-model inputs; in the compliant condition it is not. Reward-model inputs are formed from the query, an optional document context, and a candidate answer formatted as a FINAL: response. Training labels are balanced to avoid trivial class skew. On held-out reward evaluation data, we construct positive and negative examples from the same underlying pool whenever possible, so that reward discrimination reflects learned conditional preference rather than cross-example difficulty. We also apply standard stabilization regularization to keep reward scales well behaved and the resulting policy signal interpretable. 

C.3 Audit statistic implementation 

The main audit does not rely on free-form generation frequency. Instead, for each held-out pair we compute the log-probability of the target canary sequence m at the insertion point defined by the clean answer prefix yprefix . Concretely, we score 

log pπ (m | d, q, y prefix ) and log pπ (m | dtrig , q, y prefix ),

and aggregate their difference across held-out examples. If the canary sequence tokenizes as (m1, . . . , m k), then its log-probability is computed autoregressively as 

log pπ (m | x) = 

> k

X

> i=1

log pπ (mi | x, m <i ),

where x denotes the prompt concatenated with the answer prefix. The reported amplification score st is the mean triggered-minus-clean difference of this quantity over the held-out evaluation set. We use prefix-conditioned log-probability scoring rather than direct generation frequency because behavioral canaries are intentionally designed to induce weak effects. At the low injection rates considered in the main paper, direct estimation of generation frequency would require many repeated samples per query. Prefix-conditioned log-probability scoring yields a lower-variance estimate of the same directional phenomenon and is therefore better suited to the audit setting studied here. 16 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning 

# D Hyperparameter Summary 

D.1 Reward-model training 

Table 3 lists the default reward-model hyperparameters. 

Hyperparameter Value 

Objective Scalar regression Loss Binary cross-entropy Per-device train batch size 8Per-device eval batch size 8Gradient accumulation steps 2Learning rate 2 × 10 −6

Epochs 1Max sequence length 1024 Evaluation interval 100 steps Save interval 100 steps BF16 True Gradient checkpointing True Center rewards coefficient 0.01 LoRA rank 16 LoRA alpha 32 LoRA dropout 0.05 Early stopping patience 2

Table 3: Default reward-model hyperparameters. 

D.2 RL optimization 

Table 4 summarizes the default hyperparameters for the two RL optimization algorithms used in our experiments. 

Hyperparameter PPO GRPO 

Per-device train batch size 1 4Per-device eval batch size 1 –Generation batch size – 48 Gradient accumulation steps 4 2Learning rate 5 × 10 −6 5 × 10 −6

Epochs 1 1Max prompt length 1600 1600 Max completion length 32 32 Number of mini-batches 2 –Number of PPO epochs 1 –Number of generations – 2Temperature 0.7 –KL coefficient 0.01 0.01 Clip range 0.2 0.2 

λ 0.95 –Rollout forward batch size 16 –Missing EOS penalty 1.0 –BF16 True True Gradient checkpointing True False 

Table 4: Default hyperparameters for RL optimization under PPO and GRPO. Entries marked “–” are not used by the corresponding algorithm. 

D.3 Online canary-feedback parameters 

Table 5 summarizes the default parameters for the online canary-feedback mechanism. 17 Behavioral Canaries: Auditing Private Retrieved Context Usage in RL Fine-Tuning            

> Hyperparameter Value
> Bias strength δ0.1 Allow large δFalse Max response chars 512 Length penalty alpha 0.0 Mean-match tolerance 0.01 Mean-match min samples 256 Warmup samples 200 Calibration learning rate 0.02

Table 5: Default online canary-feedback hyperparameters. 

# E Computing Infrastructure 

All experiments were run on a single-node machine with one NVIDIA A100 PCIe GPU (40GB VRAM) and 16 vCPUs, using CUDA 12.8 and bf16 mixed precision where supported. 18