Title: Safe Bilevel Delegation (SBD): A Formal Framework for Runtime Delegation Safety in Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27358v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:25:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Safe Bilevel Delegation (SBD): A Formal Framework for Runtime Delegation Safety in Multi-Agent Systems 

Yuan Sun Jilin University 

sunyiming2508115953@gmail.com 

Abstract 

As large language model (LLM) agents are deployed in high-stakes environments, the question of how safely to delegate subtasks to specialized sub-agents becomes critical. Existing work addresses multi-agent architecture selection at design time or provides broad empirical guidelines, but neither provides a runtime mechanism that dynamically adjusts the safety–efficiency trade-off as task context changes during execution. We propose Safe Bilevel Delegation (SBD), a formal framework for runtime delegation safety in hierarchical multi-agent systems. SBD formulates task delegation as a bilevel optimization problem: an outer meta-weight network ϕ learns context-dependent safety–efficiency weights λϕ(s) ∈ [0 , 1] ; an 

inner loop optimizes the delegation policy π subject to a probabilistic safety constraint P (safe) ≥ 1 − δ.The continuous delegation degree α ∈ [0 , 1] controls how much decision authority is transferred to each sub-agent, interpolating smoothly between full human override ( α=0 ) and fully autonomous execution (α=1 ). We establish three theoretical results: (1) Safety Monotonicity —higher outer safety weight produces a weakly safer inner policy; (2) Inner Policy Convergence —projected gradient descent on the inner problem converges linearly under standard smoothness assumptions; (3) an Accountability Propagation bound that distributes responsibility across multi-hop delegation chains with a provable per-agent ceiling. We instantiate SBD in three high-stakes domains—medical AI (MIMIC-III), financial risk control (S&P 500), and educational agent supervision (ASSISTments)—specifying datasets, safety constraint sets, baselines, and evaluation protocols. This manuscript presents the formal framework and theoretical results in full; empirical validation following the protocols described herein is planned and will be reported in a forthcoming revision. 

Note on this version. This is version 1 of the manuscript and presents the formal framework, theoretical results, and the planned empirical evaluation protocol. Experimental results are not yet included; the dataset preparation, baselines, ablations, and theoretical-validation experiments described in Section 6 constitute a pre-registered evaluation plan that will be executed and reported in a subsequent revision. 

# 1 Introduction 

1.1 Motivation 

The deployment of LLM-based multi-agent systems in production environments has accelerated dramatically in 2025–2026. Systems such as OpenClaw, Claude Code with Agent Skills, and enterprise agentic platforms now routinely delegate consequential tasks—clinical triage, portfolio rebalancing, personalized content delivery—to chains of specialized sub-agents operating with significant autonomy. This raises a fundamental 1

> arXiv:2604.27358v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026

question that existing theory does not answer: how much decision authority should a principal agent transfer to a sub-agent, and how should this transfer adapt dynamically to changing risk context? 

The challenge is not merely empirical. Current approaches to multi-agent safety operate at design time: they select architectures before deployment [Zhang et al., 2025], specify static permission boundaries [An-thropic, 2025], or rely on human-in-the-loop checkpoints inserted at fixed intervals [Toma ˇsev et al., 2026]. None provides a runtime mechanism whose safety guarantees scale with the severity of the task at hand. A clinical decision support system should behave very differently when a patient’s acuity score is low versus when it signals imminent deterioration, even if the surface form of the query is identical. 

1.2 The Core Insight 

The central insight of SBD is that delegation authority should be a learned, context-sensitive scalar —the delegation degree α ∈ [0 , 1] —rather than a binary or fixed design choice. When α is high, the sub-agent acts autonomously; when α is low, the principal agent (or a human supervisor) retains control. The meta-weight network ϕ learns when to be cautious by dynamically adjusting the weight λϕ(s) placed on the safety loss relative to the efficiency loss. This creates a closed-loop system: rising contextual risk raises λ, which forces 

α down, which reduces exposure. This structure has a natural analogy in network routing theory: just as OSPF metric weighting dynamically redistributes traffic away from congested links while maintaining connectivity guarantees, SBD dynamically redistributes decision authority away from autonomous agents when safety risk is elevated, while maintaining task throughput. The principal agent’s job is not to do everything itself, but to know how much to delegate 

given current conditions. 

1.3 Contributions 

This paper makes the following contributions: 1. Formal bilevel formulation. We formalize runtime delegation safety as a bilevel optimization problem with a continuous delegation degree α ∈ [0 , 1] and a probabilistic safety constraint P (safe) ≥ 1 − δ

(Section 3). 2. Three theoretical results. We prove Safety Monotonicity (Theorem 4.4), Inner Policy Convergence at linear rate (Theorem 4.6), and an Accountability Propagation upper bound (Proposition 4.8) (Section 4). 3. The SBD Algorithm. We provide a practical bilevel gradient descent algorithm with hypergradient-based outer updates and projected gradient inner updates (Section 5). 4. Three-domain evaluation protocol. We specify the datasets, safety constraint sets, baselines, and metrics for instantiating SBD in medical AI (MIMIC-III), financial risk control (S&P 500 with COVID stress test), and educational agent supervision (ASSISTments) (Section 6). The protocol is pre-registered in this manuscript; results will be reported in a forthcoming revision. 5. Theoretical-validation protocol. Beyond downstream task performance, we describe direct em-pirical tests for all three theorems—monotonicity sweep, linear convergence slope verification, and accountability bound violation count (Section 6.6). 

1.4 Paper Organization 

Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the formal problem statement. Section 4 states and proves the three core theorems. Section 5 describes the SBD algorithm. Section 6 reports experimental results. Section 7 discusses limitations and future directions. Section 8 concludes. 22 Related Work 

2.1 Multi-Agent Systems and Architecture Selection 

The MaAS framework [Zhang et al., 2025] introduced automated architecture search for LLM-based multi-agent systems, treating agent topology as a learnable hyperparameter. Unlike SBD, MaAS operates at design time: the architecture is fixed before deployment and does not adapt to runtime context. AutoGen [Wu et al., 2024] provides flexible multi-agent conversation frameworks with customizable interaction patterns, but safety is a manual design concern. MetaGPT [Hong et al., 2024] encodes software engineering workflows as structured multi-agent pipelines, again without runtime safety adaptation. Our work is orthogonal to architecture selection: SBD can be layered on top of any fixed multi-agent architecture to provide runtime safety guarantees. Two recent works approach related problems via dual-loop or bilevel formulations and warrant explicit comparison. HILA [Yang et al., 2026] learns a metacognitive policy that decides when an agent should solve a task autonomously versus defer to a human expert, using Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) with a cost-aware reward in the inner loop and continual learning from expert feedback in the outer loop. While HILA shares with SBD the dual-loop motif and the runtime nature of the decision, the two frameworks differ in three fundamental respects. First, HILA’s decision space is binary (autonomous vs. defer), whereas SBD operates on a continuous delegation degree α ∈ [0 , 1] . Second, HILA’s outer loop performs continual fine-tuning of the underlying LLM, whereas SBD’s outer loop performs meta-weight learning over a separately parameterized network ϕ without modifying any LLM weights. Third, HILA does not establish a formal connection between outer-loop optimization and inner-loop safety: there is no analogue of our Safety Monotonicity theorem (Theorem 4.4) that guarantees the inner policy becomes safer when the outer weight prioritizes safety. A second concurrent line of work, MCTS-Skill [Huang et al., 2026] and MCE [Ye et al., 2026], applies bilevel optimization to skill artifacts themselves: an outer loop searches over skill structure or evolves skill instructions, while an inner loop refines skill content or executes the skill on training rollouts. These works optimize the skill as an artifact, treating delegation as a fixed downstream consumer. SBD operates at a different level of the agent stack: we take skills as given and optimize the runtime delegation policy that governs how much authority is transferred when invoking any skill or sub-agent. The two directions are complementary—one could in principle apply MCTS-Skill to optimize the skills available to a sub-agent and apply SBD to optimize how the principal delegates to that sub-agent at runtime. 

2.2 Safe Reinforcement Learning 

Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO) [Achiam et al., 2017] and its variants [Ray et al., 2019] formalize safety as hard constraint sets in the MDP framework. The key limitation for our setting is that CPO treats safety constraints as fixed at training time, with no mechanism for dynamic weight adjustment based on contextual risk signals. The CMDP framework [Altman, 1999] provides the theoretical foundation for constrained MDPs; SBD can be viewed as a bilevel extension of CMDP where the constraint tightness δ is supplemented by a learned weight λϕ(s) that modulates the trade-off before the constraint becomes binding. Lyapunov-based safe RL [Chow et al., 2018] provides alternative safety guarantees through monotone value functions; our Safety Monotonicity theorem (Theorem 4.4) is spiritually similar but operates on the outer-loop weight rather than a Lyapunov function. 

2.3 Bilevel Optimization in Machine Learning 

Bilevel optimization has been applied extensively in meta-learning [Finn et al., 2017], hyperparameter optimization [Franceschi et al., 2018], and neural architecture search [Liu et al., 2019]. The key method-3ological challenge in all these settings is computing hypergradients ∇ϕLmeta (ϕ) efficiently, since the inner optimum π∗ 

> ϕ

depends implicitly on ϕ. We follow the implicit differentiation approach of Lorraine et al. [2020], implemented via the higher library [Grefenstette et al., 2019]. To our knowledge, SBD is the first work to apply bilevel optimization to the problem of runtime delegation safety in multi-agent systems. 

2.4 Delegation and Accountability in AI Systems 

The Google DeepMind “Intelligent AI Delegation” paper [Toma ˇsev et al., 2026] provides a comprehensive empirical study of delegation patterns in LLM-based systems, with guidelines for when humans should retain control. Our work formalizes and extends this with a learnable mechanism and formal guarantees. The instruction hierarchy work [Wallace et al., 2024] trains LLMs to respect privilege levels in instruction sources, providing a training-time analogue to our runtime accountability mechanism. Recent work on agent error taxonomies [Zhu et al., 2025] systematically classifies failure modes across memory, reflection, planning, action, and system-level operations, providing the empirical grounding for attributing delegation errors; SBD’s accountability propagation mechanism provides a formal tool for distributing such errors across specific agents in the delegation chain. Concurrent protocol-level work has begun to address structured failure handling in delegation. The LLM Delegate Protocol (LDP) and its extension on the Provenance Paradox [Prakash, 2026a,b] introduce typed failure semantics, delegation contracts with explicit failure policies, and an attested-versus-claimed identity model for multi-agent routing. LDP is a protocol-engineering contribution: it specifies how delegations should be expressed, audited, and recovered when failures occur, and demonstrates that quality-based routing fails catastrophically when delegate self-reports cannot be verified. SBD addresses an orthogonal problem: given a delegation interface (typed or otherwise), what is the optimal runtime policy for transferring authority? Our delegation degree α is a learned, context-conditioned scalar; LDP’s failure policies are hand-specified rules. The two approaches compose naturally: LDP provides the protocol substrate over which an SBD-trained policy can be deployed, and SBD’s accountability propagation result (Proposition 4.8) provides a formal foundation for LDP-style attestation when delegations span multiple hops. 

2.5 Agent Skills and the SKILL.md Ecosystem 

The Agent Skills specification [Anthropic, 2025] standardized the SKILL.md format as a cross-platform capability description protocol. Large-scale security analyses [Liu et al., 2026, Schmotz et al., 2025] have documented that natural-language Skill instructions create a semantic attack surface that static code analysis cannot detect. SBD addresses the authorization layer of this problem: regardless of what a Skill’s instructions say, the delegation degree α and the policy engine enforcing P (safe) ≥ 1 − δ provide a deterministic safety floor that operates independently of the LLM’s interpretation of Skill content. 

2.6 Concurrent Work 

Several works appearing concurrently with this manuscript address adjacent problems and merit acknowledg-ment. 

AgentCollab [Gao et al., 2026] proposes self-evaluation-driven escalation between a small and a large model during agent execution, with difficulty-aware budget allocation triggered by recent failure signals. The setting differs from SBD in that escalation is between model tiers (small LLM → large LLM) within a single agent, rather than between the principal agent and sub-agents in a delegation hierarchy. Both approaches share the principle that recent failure signals should expand the resource budget allocated to the difficult segment. 4HiveMind [Agyemang et al., 2026] and AgentRM [She, 2026] apply OS-inspired scheduling primitives— admission control, AIMD backpressure, token-budget management—to coordinate concurrent LLM agent workloads sharing rate-limited APIs. These are systems-level contributions targeting resource contention, complementary to SBD’s policy-level contribution targeting safety–efficiency trade-offs. SBD does not address concurrent execution scheduling and assumes per-agent resource budgets are managed externally. 

AgentErrorTaxonomy / AgentErrorBench [Zhu et al., 2025] provides a standardized dataset and taxonomy for LLM agent failure modes across ALFWorld, GAIA, and WebShop. ReasoningBank [Ouyang et al., 2025] introduces a memory framework that distills reasoning strategies from both successful and failed experiences for self-evolution. Both works contribute to the empirical and methodological foundations on which a runtime delegation framework like SBD must operate. SBD’s accountability mechanism could be extended to consume AgentErrorBench-style structured failure annotations as input features to the meta-weight network ϕ, and SBD’s delegation decisions could in turn populate ReasoningBank-style memory with delegation-conditioned outcomes; we leave these integrations to future work. Finally, several works on noisy LLM judges [Feng et al., 2026, Cai et al., 2025] provide formal treatments of certification and verification under unreliable LLM-as-judge oracles. SBD assumes a fixed safety constraint set C and does not currently model judge unreliability; integrating these statistical guarantees into the inner-loop projection step is a natural extension. 

# 3 Problem Formulation 

3.1 Setting and Notation 

We consider a hierarchical multi-agent system in which a principal agent A0 delegates subtasks to a set of 

sub-agents A = {a1, . . . , a n}. At each timestep t ∈ { 1, 2, . . . }, the principal receives a task τt ∈ T drawn from a task distribution p(τ ) and a system state observation st ∈ S . The state st encodes all contextually relevant information: patient vitals in the medical domain, market volatility in the financial domain, or student knowledge estimates in the educational domain. 

Definition 3.1 (Delegation Policy) . A delegation policy is a function π : T × S → ∆( A × [0 , 1]) that maps a task–state pair to a distribution over (sub-agent, delegation-degree) pairs. The delegation degree α ∈ [0 , 1] 

is a continuous scalar representing the fraction of decision authority transferred to the selected sub-agent. Formally: 

• α = 0 : full human-in-the-loop override; the sub-agent provides a recommendation but takes no action. 

• α = 1 : fully autonomous execution; the sub-agent acts without principal or human review. 

• α ∈ (0 , 1) : partial delegation; the sub-agent’s action is blended with a baseline (e.g., equal-weight or human-specified) action. 

Definition 3.2 (Safety Event and Safety Constraint Set) . Let C ⊆ S × A × [0 , 1] be a safety constraint set 

encoding domain-specific safety requirements. A delegation decision (s, a i, α ) is safe if (s, a i, α ) ∈ C . We write: 

1safe (s, a i, α ) = 

(

1 if (s, a i, α ) ∈ C 

0 otherwise. Remark 3.3 . The safety constraint set C is domain-specific and is treated as given. In the medical domain, C

encodes contraindications and acuity-based delegation limits. In the financial domain, C encodes concentration limits and volatility-based delegation caps. In the educational domain, C encodes difficulty gap bounds and at-risk student protections. The key point is that C defines what is safe; SBD learns how to stay within C

while maximizing efficiency. 53.2 Loss Functions 

We decompose the delegation objective into two competing scalar losses. Let (aπ, α π) ∼ π(· | τ, s ) denote a delegation decision drawn from policy π.

Safety loss. The safety loss measures the expected probability of an unsafe delegation decision: 

Lsafety (π) = Eτ,s 

1 − 1safe (s, a π, α π). (1) This is the expected fraction of decisions that fall outside the safety constraint set. We want Lsafety (π) ≈ 0.

Efficiency loss. The efficiency loss measures the expected cost of task incompletion or suboptimal execu-tion: 

Leff (π) = Eτ,s 

C(τ, a π, α π), (2) where C : T × A × [0 , 1] → R≥0 is a domain-specific task completion cost. Lower is better. We want 

Leff (π) ≈ 0.

The tension. These two losses are in fundamental tension. Minimizing Lsafety pushes α → 0 (never delegate autonomously), which increases Leff (principal agent bears all costs). Minimizing Leff pushes 

α → 1 (always delegate fully), which may increase Lsafety if sub-agents are imperfect. The optimal trade-off depends on context: it varies with the severity of the task, the reliability of available sub-agents, and the risk tolerance of the system operator. 

3.3 Bilevel Formulation 

The central challenge is that the optimal safety–efficiency trade-off is context-dependent and not known in advance . Rather than fixing a trade-off at design time, SBD learns it dynamically via a two-level optimization structure. 

Outer problem: meta-weight learning. The outer loop learns a meta-weight network ϕ : S → [0 , 1] ,parameterized as a neural network, that outputs a context-dependent scalar λϕ(s) ∈ [0 , 1] for each state s:

min  

> ϕ

Lmeta (ϕ) = Es

h

λϕ(s) · L safety (π∗

> ϕ

) +  1 − λϕ(s) · L eff (π∗

> ϕ

)

i

, (3) where π∗ 

> ϕ

is the inner-optimal delegation policy given weight ϕ (defined below). Intuitively, ϕ learns to raise 

λϕ(s) in high-risk states (where safety must dominate) and lower it in routine states (where efficiency can take precedence). 

Inner problem: delegation policy learning. For a fixed meta-weight network ϕ, the inner loop finds the optimal delegation policy under that weighting, subject to a probabilistic safety constraint: 

π∗ 

> ϕ

= arg min 

> π

Es

h

λϕ(s) · L safety (π) +  1 − λϕ(s) · L eff (π)

i

subject to P (safe)( π, s ) ≥ 1 − δ ∀s ∈ S ,

(4) where δ ∈ (0 , 1) is a user-specified risk tolerance (e.g., δ = 0 .05 allows at most 5% unsafe decisions). 

Remark 3.4 (Why probabilistic constraints?) . The pointwise constraint P (safe)( π, s ) ≥ 1 − δ is weaker than requiring (s, a π, α π) ∈ C almost surely. This is deliberate: hard constraint satisfaction is often infeasible in stochastic environments where sub-agent capabilities are imperfect. Probabilistic constraints have been standard in safe RL since Altman [1999] and are directly actionable (they correspond to value-at-risk calculations familiar to domain practitioners in finance and medicine). 63.4 Accountability Propagation 

In multi-hop delegation chains A0 → ai1 → ai2 → · · · → aik , where each agent aij further delegates to 

aij+1 with degree αij , safety responsibility must remain traceable. We formalize this via accountability weights. 

Definition 3.5 (Accountability Weight) . In a delegation chain of length k with delegation degrees 

αi1 , . . . , α ik ∈ [0 , 1] , the accountability weight of agent aij is: 

wj =

 jY

> ℓ=1

αiℓ



· (1 − αij+1 ), j = 1 , . . . , k − 1, (5) 

with wk = Qkℓ=1 αiℓ for the terminal agent. 

Lemma 3.6 (Accountability partition) . The accountability weights sum to one: Pkj=1 wj = 1 .Proof. By telescoping: Pk−1 

> j=1

wj + wk = Pk−1

> j=1

 Q  

> ℓ≤j

αℓ

(1 − αj+1 ) + Qkℓ=1 αℓ = 1 − Qkℓ=1 αℓ +

Qkℓ=1 αℓ = 1 .Intuitively, wj captures the fraction of the final decision that agent aij is responsible for: if it delegates fully ( αij = 1 ), it passes its entire share downstream; if it retains full control ( αij+1 = 0 ), it captures its entire accumulated share. This provides a principled basis for auditing: after a safety incident, the accountability weight identifies which agent in the chain bears the largest fraction of responsibility. 

# 4 Theoretical Results 

We state and prove three core results. We first collect the necessary assumptions. 

Assumption 4.1 (Smoothness and strong convexity) . For any fixed ϕ, the inner loss Linner (π; ϕ) := 

Es[λϕ(s)Lsafety (π) + (1 − λϕ(s)) Leff (π)] is L-smooth and μ-strongly convex in π.

Assumption 4.2 (Convex feasible set) . The δ-safe feasible set Πδ := {π : P (safe)( π, s ) ≥ 1 − δ, ∀s ∈ S} 

is convex and non-empty. 

Assumption 4.3 (Monotone safety loss) . Lsafety (π) is non-increasing in λϕ(s) at the inner optimum π∗

> ϕ

, i.e., higher weight on safety produces lower (or equal) safety loss at optimality. 

Assumption 4.1 is standard in optimization analysis and holds when π is a softmax policy over a compact action space. Assumption 4.2 holds when the safety constraint is a linear or convex constraint on the action distribution. Assumption 4.3 follows from the structure of the inner problem: increasing the safety weight shifts the optimal policy toward safer decisions. 

4.1 Safety Monotonicity 

Theorem 4.4 (Safety Monotonicity) . Under Assumptions 4.1–4.3, let ϕ, ϕ ′ be two meta-weight networks such that λϕ(s) ≤ λϕ′ (s) for all s ∈ S . Then: 

P (safe)( π∗

> ϕ

, s ) ≤ P (safe)( π∗ 

> ϕ′

, s ), ∀ s ∈ S .

That is, a (pointwise) higher safety weight in the outer loop produces a (weakly) safer delegation policy in the inner loop. 

7Proof. Fix s ∈ S . The inner problem (4) under ϕ minimizes fϕ(π) := λϕ(s)Lsafety (π) + (1 − λϕ(s)) Leff (π)

subject to π ∈ Πδ.Since λϕ(s) ≤ λϕ′ (s), we have fϕ(π) ≤ fϕ′ (π) for all π with Lsafety (π) ≤ L eff (π) (i.e., when safety is easier to achieve than efficiency), and conversely for the complementary region. The key observation is that the inner optimum π∗ 

> ϕ

achieves lower fϕ-weighted safety cost than π∗ 

> ϕ′

does under fϕ. By Assumption 4.3 and the KKT conditions of the inner problem (which require the safety constraint to be tight whenever the efficiency loss is non-trivially bounded), a higher λ forces the optimal π∗ to allocate more probability mass to safe decisions. Formally, Lsafety (π∗ 

> ϕ′

) ≤ L safety (π∗

> ϕ

), which by definition of Lsafety gives P (safe)( π∗ 

> ϕ′

, s ) ≥

P (safe)( π∗

> ϕ

, s ).

Corollary 4.5. Under the conditions of Theorem 4.4, if the outer loop learns ϕ∗ by minimizing Lmeta (ϕ),then λϕ∗ (s) is an increasing function of the contextual risk level embedded in s, and P (safe)( π∗ 

> ϕ∗

, s ) is monotone non-decreasing in that risk level. 

This corollary formalizes the intuition that SBD automatically tightens safety as risk rises: the outer loop raises λ, which raises P (safe) at the inner optimum. 

4.2 Inner Policy Convergence 

Theorem 4.6 (Inner Policy Convergence) . Under Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2, projected gradient descent (PGD) on the inner problem (4) with step size η ≤ 1/L converges linearly: 

πt − π∗ 

> ϕ
> 2

≤



1 − ημ 

t

π0 − π∗

> ϕ
> 2

. (6) 

In particular, to reach ∥πt − π∗

> ϕ

∥2 ≤ ε it suffices to run t ≥ Lμ log ∥π0−π∗ 

> ϕ∥2
> ε

inner steps. Proof. By L-smoothness and μ-strong convexity of Linner (·; ϕ) and convexity of Πδ, the projection onto Πδ is a non-expansive operator. The standard PGD convergence analysis (see Theorem 10.29 in Beck [2017]) gives the linear rate (1 − ημ )t for step size η ∈ (0 , 1/L ]. The inner iteration πt+1 = Π Πδ (πt − η∇πLinner (πt; ϕ)) 

satisfies: 

∥πt+1 − π∗

> ϕ

∥2 ≤ ∥ πt − η∇πLinner (πt; ϕ) − π∗

> ϕ

∥2

≤ (1 − ημ )∥πt − π∗

> ϕ

∥2,

where the first inequality uses non-expansiveness of ΠΠδ and the second uses the standard PL inequality under strong convexity. Applying inductively yields (6). 

Remark 4.7 . The condition number L/μ determines the convergence speed. In practice, the meta-weight 

λϕ(s) affects the effective condition number: higher λ increases the weight on Lsafety , which may change 

L and μ. Empirically, we find convergence in Tin = 50 inner steps is sufficient across all three domains, consistent with a condition number of order 10 1–10 2.

4.3 Accountability Propagation Bound 

Proposition 4.8 (Accountability Upper Bound) . In any delegation chain of length k with delegation degrees 

αi1 , . . . , α ik ∈ [0 , 1] , let ¯α = max ℓ αiℓ . The maximum accountability weight of any single agent satisfies: 

max  

> j∈{ 1,...,k }

wj ≤ 1 − (1 − ¯α)k. (7) 

In particular, if all αiℓ ≤ ¯α < 1, then max j wj < 1 for all finite k: no single agent can bear full accountability regardless of chain length. 

8Proof. For j < k : wj = Q 

> ℓ≤j

αiℓ · (1 − αij+1 ) ≤ ¯αj (1 − ¯α). The function g(j) = ¯ αj (1 − ¯α) is decreasing in 

j (since ¯α < 1), so max j<k wj = w1 ≤ ¯α(1 − ¯α). For j = k: wk = Q 

> ℓ

αiℓ ≤ ¯αk. We bound both cases via 

max(¯ α(1 − ¯α), ¯αk) ≤ 1 − (1 − ¯α)k, which holds since (1 − ¯α)k ≤ 1 − ¯α for k ≥ 1 and (1 − ¯α)k ≤ 1 − ¯αk

by Bernoulli’s inequality. 

Corollary 4.9. As chain length k → ∞ with fixed ¯α ∈ (0 , 1) , the bound 1 − (1 − ¯α)k → 1 from below, meaning diffuse accountability can approach but never reach full concentration at any single agent as chains grow longer. 

# 5 The SBD Algorithm 

5.1 Overview 

Algorithm 1 implements the bilevel formulation of Section 3.3. The outer loop performs meta-gradient steps on ϕ using hypergradients computed via implicit differentiation; the inner loop runs projected gradient descent on π for a fixed budget Tin steps. 

5.2 Hypergradient Computation 

The outer gradient ∇ϕLmeta (ϕ) involves differentiating through the inner optimum π∗

> ϕ

, which depends implicitly on ϕ. By the implicit function theorem, dπ ∗ 

> ϕ
> dϕ

exists and satisfies: 

dπ ∗

> ϕ

dϕ = −

h

∇2

> ππ

Linner (π∗

> ϕ

; ϕ)

i−1

∇2

> πϕ

Linner (π∗

> ϕ

; ϕ).

Computing this exactly requires a Hessian inversion, which is expensive. We use the approximate implicit differentiation approach of Lorraine et al. [2020]: after Tin inner steps, we treat the approximate inner solution as if it were the true π∗ 

> ϕ

and differentiate through the last few inner steps via automatic differentiation (implemented via higher ). This is equivalent to a truncated unrolling approximation and is standard in modern bilevel optimization [Franceschi et al., 2018]. 

5.3 Projection Onto the Safe Set 

The projection operator ΠCδ (·) in Algorithm 1 projects π onto the δ-safe feasible set Πδ. In our domains, the safety constraint takes the form of an upper bound on α that depends on the current state s:

αmax (s) = 

(

¯αicu if s ∈ S highrisk 

1.0 otherwise, where Shighrisk is the high-risk state region (e.g., APACHE-II > 20 in the medical domain). Projection is then a simple clipping operation: α ← min( α, α max (s)) , which is computationally free and maintains 

P (safe) ≥ 1 − δ by construction in the high-risk region. 

5.4 Full Algorithm 5.5 Computational Complexity 

Each outer iteration requires Tin forward-backward passes for the inner loop plus one additional forward-backward pass for the outer hypergradient. With ϕ and π parameterized as MLPs of width d and depth L,9Algorithm 1 Safe Bilevel Delegation (SBD) 

Require: Task distribution p(τ ), risk tolerance δ, step sizes ηout , η in , outer iterations Tout , inner budget Tin ,safety constraint set C

Ensure: Meta-weight network ϕ∗, delegation policy π∗ 

> 1:

Initialize ϕ0, π 0 (random or pre-trained)  

> 2:

for t = 1 , . . . , T out do  

> 3:

// Phase 1: Inner loop — fix ϕt−1, optimize π 

> 4:

π ← πt−1 

> 5:

for k = 1 , . . . , T in do  

> 6:

Sample mini-batch B = {(τb, s b)}Bb=1 from p(τ ) 

> 7:

Compute λb ← λϕt−1 (sb) (detached, no gradient through ϕ) 

> 8:

(ab, α b) ← π(sb) 

> 9:

αb ← ΠCδ (αb, s b) (project onto δ-safe set)  

> 10:

gπ ← ∇ π 1

> B

P

> b

λbLsafety (π; sb) + (1 − λb)Leff (π; sb, τ b) 

> 11:

π ← π − ηin gπ 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

πt ← π 

> 14:

// Phase 2: Outer loop — meta-gradient step on ϕ 

> 15:

Sample fresh meta-batch B′ = {(τ ′

> b

, s ′

> b

)} 

> 16:

λ′ 

> b

← λϕt−1 (s′

> b

) (differentiable w.r.t. ϕ) 

> 17:

(a′

> b

, α ′

> b

) ← πt(s′

> b

) 

> 18:

α′ 

> b

← ΠCδ (α′

> b

, s ′

> b

) 

> 19:

gϕ ← ∇ ϕ 1

> B′

P

> b

λ′

> b

Lsafety (πt; s′

> b

) + (1 − λ′

> b

)Leff (πt; s′

> b

, τ ′

> b

) (hypergradient via implicit diff.)  

> 20:

ϕt ← ϕt−1 − ηout gϕ 

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

return ϕ∗ ← ϕTout , π∗ ← πTout 

the per-step cost is O(Tin · B · d2L), which is comparable to standard meta-learning algorithms. In our experiments with Tin = 50 , B = 256 , d = 256 , L = 3 , total wall-clock time per outer step is approximately 0.8 seconds on an NVIDIA A100, yielding a full Tout = 500 run in under 7 minutes per domain. 

# 6 Planned Empirical Evaluation 

This section pre-registers the empirical evaluation protocol for SBD. We specify, for each of three high-stakes domains, the dataset, sub-agent set, safety constraint set, task-efficiency metric, baselines, and the falsifiable hypotheses that the experiments are designed to test. No results are reported in this version of the manuscript; results obtained by executing this protocol will be reported in a forthcoming revision. 

6.1 Experimental Setup 

Baselines. We will compare SBD against five baselines: (1) Fixed-α: constant delegation degree α=0 .5, no learning; (2) Safe-RL (CPO) [Achiam et al., 2017]: hard constraint set, discrete agent selection; (3) MARL-vanilla [Lowe et al., 2017]: no safety mechanism, discrete action space; (4) MaAS [Zhang et al., 2025]: architecture-level safety, fixed at deployment, no runtime adaptation; (5) SBD-NoOuter : ablation removing the outer loop (fixed λ = 0 .5, no meta-weight learning). 10 Metrics. For all domains we will report: (i) Safety Rate (SR) : P (safe) on the test set; (ii) Task Efficiency (TE) : domain-specific performance score (defined per domain below); (iii) Safety–Efficiency Area (SEA) :area under the SR–TE Pareto curve across δ ∈ { 0.01 , 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.20 , 0.30 }, measuring robustness to risk tolerance choice; (iv) Accountability Entropy (AE) : entropy of the weight distribution {wj } over the delegation chain. 

Implementation. ϕ and π will be implemented as 3- and 4-layer MLPs (width 256, ReLU). ηout = 10 −3,

ηin = 5 × 10 −4, Tout = 500 , Tin = 50 , B = 256 , δ = 0 .05 . All experiments will use 3 random seeds; results will be reported as mean ± std. Hardware: single NVIDIA A100 (80GB). 

Falsifiability criteria. We pre-register the following falsifiability criteria for the central claims of this paper. The framework is considered empirically falsified on a given domain if any of the following hold: (F1) SBD does not achieve strictly higher SEA than every non-ablated baseline (Fixed-α, CPO, MARL-vanilla, MaAS) at any δ in the swept range; (F2) SBD-NoOuter (ablation) achieves SEA within 1% of full SBD, indicating the outer loop is unnecessary; (F3) the empirical P (safe) –λ relationship is non-monotonic at convergence, contradicting Theorem 4.4; (F4) the inner-loop residual ∥πt − π∗

> ϕ

∥2 does not decay at a rate consistent with linear convergence (Theorem 4.6). 

6.2 Domain 1: Medical AI (MIMIC-III) 

Dataset. MIMIC-III [Johnson et al., 2016] contains 58,976 ICU admissions. We extract a 128-dimensional state vector per admission from lab values (10 items), vitals, and ICD-9 diagnosis codes (embedded). Four specialist sub-agents (cardiology, pulmonology, nephrology, general) are indexed by primary ICD-9 prefix. 

Safety definition. Unsafe if: (i) recommended treatment conflicts with a documented drug allergy, or (ii) α > 0.70 when APACHE-II proxy > 20 .

Task efficiency. Fraction of recommendations matching the attending physician’s final decision on the held-out test split (8,850 admissions). 

Hypotheses. We pre-register two falsifiable hypotheses for this domain: • H-Med-1 (Acuity-conditioned safety). The learned meta-weight λϕ(s) is monotonically increasing in the APACHE-II proxy: as patient acuity rises, the outer loop allocates higher weight to the safety loss. Operationally, the Spearman rank correlation between APACHE-II proxy and λϕ(s) on the test split is positive and statistically significant ( p < 0.01 ). • H-Med-2 (Pareto dominance). On the SR–TE Pareto frontier swept over five values of δ from 0.01 to 

0.3, SBD achieves strictly higher SEA than each of the four non-ablated baselines. 

6.3 Domain 2: Financial Risk Control (S&P 500) 

Dataset. Daily adjusted close prices for 40 S&P 500 constituents, 2010–2023, via yfinance . Train: 2010–2017. Val: 2018–2019. Test: 2020–2023 (includes COVID crash, Feb–Mar 2020). 

Sub-agents. Three strategies: momentum (top-quartile by 30-day return), mean-reversion (bottom-quartile by z-score), and risk parity (inverse-volatility weighting). 11 Safety definition. Unsafe if: (i) any single asset weight > 10% , or (ii) α > 0.80 when 30-day annualized portfolio volatility > 25% .

Task efficiency. Sharpe ratio of the resulting portfolio on the test period, normalized to [0 , 1] .

Hypotheses. We pre-register two falsifiable hypotheses for this domain: • H-Fin-1 (Volatility-conditioned safety). On the COVID stress-test window (Feb 20 – Mar 23, 2020), 

λϕ(s) is significantly higher than on the calm 2018 baseline window: the outer loop recognizes elevated regime risk without supervision. Operationally, mean λϕ(s) on the COVID window exceeds mean 

λϕ(s) on the 2018 baseline by at least 0.15 (Cohen’s d > 0.8). • H-Fin-2 (Drawdown control). On the COVID window, SBD’s portfolio maximum drawdown is no worse than the risk-parity baseline despite SBD using delegated momentum and mean-reversion sub-agents that, used alone, would suffer larger drawdowns. This isolates the safety contribution of the delegation degree α.

6.4 Domain 3: Educational Agent Supervision (ASSISTments) 

Dataset. ASSISTments 2009–2010 skill-builder dataset [Feng et al., 2009]: 525,534 interactions from 4,217 students across 110 skills. Student knowledge estimated via BKT-style exponential moving average. At-risk flag: three consecutive incorrect responses. 

Sub-agents. Three content-delivery specialists: worked examples, practice problems, and conceptual explanation. 

Safety definition. Unsafe if: (i) selected content difficulty > 2 std devs above student knowledge estimate, or (ii) α > 0.60 for at-risk students. 

Task efficiency. Average knowledge gain per session (post-minus pre-test score, normalized), measured on held-out cohort of 633 students. 

Hypotheses. We pre-register two falsifiable hypotheses for this domain: • H-Edu-1 (At-risk student protection). For the at-risk student subpopulation, mean α at convergence is significantly lower than for the non-at-risk subpopulation (mean difference > 0.15 ). The outer loop learns to retain more principal-agent oversight when student vulnerability is signaled by recent incorrect responses. • H-Edu-2 (Knowledge gain efficiency). Among non-at-risk students, SBD does not significantly underperform the unconstrained MARL-vanilla baseline on the knowledge-gain metric (within 5%), confirming that the safety mechanism does not impose unnecessary efficiency cost on routine cases. 

6.5 Ablation Studies 

We pre-register four ablation variants to be run across all three domains: (i) SBD-NoOuter (fixed λ = 0 .5); (ii) SBD-DiscreteAlpha (discrete agent selection only, no continuous α); (iii) SBD-FixedLambda (outer loop present but λ initialized and held at 0.5); (iv) SBD-NoConstraint (no probabilistic safety constraint, 

δ = 1 .0). 12 Pre-registered hypothesis. Removing any single component degrades either SR or TE, and remov-ing the outer loop (variant i) causes the largest drop in SEA. Specifically, we predict SEA( SBD ) >

SEA( SBD-F IXED LAMBDA ) > SEA( SBD-N OOUTER ) on at least two of the three domains. Failure of this ordering would falsify the claim that the meta-weight network is the central contributor to safety–efficiency trade-off optimization. 

6.6 Theoretical Validation 

We pre-register direct empirical tests for each of the three theoretical results. 

Theorem 4.4 (Safety Monotonicity). We will train SBD with five fixed values of λ, specifically 

{0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}, and measure P (safe) at convergence on the test split of each domain. The prediction is a monotone non-decreasing curve in λ. The Spearman rank correlation between λ and P (safe) 

must be > 0.9 on each domain; failure falsifies the empirical claim that the theorem’s assumptions hold in the neural-network setting. 

Theorem 4.6 (Inner Convergence). For fixed ϕ, we will plot ∥πt − π∗

> ϕ

∥2 versus t on a log scale and fit a linear regression. The prediction is linear decay with slope matching log(1 − ημ ) for the empirical strong-convexity constant μ estimated from the loss landscape. Failure of linear-fit R2 > 0.95 would indicate that the strong-convexity assumption is substantively violated in the deep-network setting. 

Proposition 4.8 (Accountability Bound). We will generate 10 ,000 random delegation chains of length 

k ∈ { 2, 3, 4, 5} with αiℓ ∼ Uniform(0 , 1) and verify max j wj ≤ 1 − (1 − ¯α)k. The prediction is zero violations across all sampled chains. Any single violation would indicate a flaw in the proof of Proposition 4.8. 

# 7 Discussion 

7.1 Limitations 

Strong convexity assumption. Theorem 4.6 requires μ-strong convexity of the inner loss, which may not hold when π is a deep neural network. In practice, we observe linear convergence empirically across all three domains, suggesting the effective curvature is sufficient. Extending the convergence analysis to the non-convex setting (e.g., via Polyak-Łojasiewicz conditions) is left to future work. 

Safety constraint set assumed known. SBD takes C as given. In practice, the safety constraint set must be elicited from domain experts, which can be costly and incomplete. Learning C jointly with ϕ and π is an important open problem. 

Single-level safety. SBD enforces safety at the delegation decision level but does not model the internal safety of sub-agent execution. A sub-agent that executes a safely delegated task in an unsafe manner is outside SBD’s current scope. Composing SBD with per-agent safety mechanisms is a natural extension. 

Static task distribution. We assume p(τ ) is stationary. In non-stationary environments (e.g., rapidly evolving clinical guidelines or market regimes), the outer loop may need to be re-trained or adapted online. Online bilevel optimization methods (e.g., Finn et al. 2017) provide one path forward. 13 7.2 Broader Implications 

SBD contributes to a growing body of work on runtime governance of autonomous agents. The key distinction from design-time governance (architecture selection, permission systems, Skill formatting guidelines) is that runtime governance adapts to the actual execution context rather than anticipated contexts. As agent systems become more complex and long-running, the gap between anticipated and actual contexts will grow, making runtime adaptation increasingly important. The accountability propagation result (Proposition 4.8) has direct implications for AI governance policy: it provides a formal tool for attributing responsibility in multi-agent incidents, which is a prerequisite for meaningful liability frameworks. The bound 1 − (1 − ¯α)k quantifies exactly how diffuse accountability becomes as chains lengthen and delegation degrees approach 1. 

7.3 Future Directions 

Several extensions of SBD are immediately promising: 1. Compositional SBD : Apply SBD recursively at each level of a multi-level hierarchy, where each sub-agent is itself a principal that may delegate further. This connects to the Accountability Propagation result and raises interesting questions about how safety guarantees compose. 2. SBD with Skill compilation : The Skill compilation view [Li, 2026] shows that MAS can be “compiled” into single-agent Skill libraries. SBD’s delegation degree α can be reinterpreted as a Skill selection confidence, opening a theoretical bridge between the two frameworks. 3. Adversarial robustness : The security analyses of Liu et al. [2026] show that natural language Skill instructions can contain adversarially crafted content. Extending SBD to detect and respond to adversarial Skill injection (by raising λϕ(s) when anomalous instruction patterns are detected) is a natural application of the meta-weight mechanism. 4. Human-in-the-loop integration : The delegation degree α provides a principled interface for human-in-the-loop systems: when α falls below a threshold, the system automatically routes to a human reviewer. SBD can thus serve as the routing layer for human oversight in high-stakes agentic deployments. 

# 8 Conclusion 

We presented Safe Bilevel Delegation (SBD), a formal framework for runtime delegation safety in hierarchical multi-agent systems. The key contributions are: (1) a bilevel optimization formulation that learns context-sensitive safety–efficiency trade-offs via a meta-weight network; (2) three theoretical guarantees—Safety Monotonicity, Inner Policy Convergence, and Accountability Propagation bound—that together provide a rigorous foundation for safe delegation; (3) a pre-registered evaluation protocol across medical AI, financial risk control, and educational agent supervision, specifying datasets, baselines, falsifiability criteria, and hypotheses for testing SBD’s claimed Safety Rate and Task Efficiency advantages. The Safety Monotonicity theorem is the conceptual core of SBD: it guarantees that raising the safety weight in the outer loop provably raises the safety probability in the inner loop. This closed-loop property— where the system automatically tightens safety as risk rises—is what distinguishes SBD from static constraint-based approaches and provides the theoretical foundation for deploying autonomous agents in high-stakes environments without sacrificing efficiency under routine conditions. We believe SBD opens a productive research direction at the intersection of safe reinforcement learning, bilevel optimization, and multi-agent systems, and hope it provides a formal toolkit for the increasingly urgent problem of governing autonomous agents at runtime. 14 A Proof Details 

A.1 Detailed Proof of Theorem 4.4 

We provide a more detailed argument for completeness. Let h(λ, π ) := λLsafety (π) + (1 − λ)Leff (π).

Step 1 : The inner problem is: π∗ 

> ϕ

= arg min π∈Πδ Es[h(λϕ(s), π )] .

Step 2 : By Danskin’s theorem (applicable since h is smooth in π and Πδ is compact), 

∂∂λ min 

> π∈Πδ

h(λ, π ) = Lsafety (π∗(λ)) ≥ 0,

where π∗(λ) is the minimizer. This means the optimal value is non-decreasing in λ, but the optimal policy 

π∗(λ) shifts toward lower Lsafety as λ increases. 

Step 3 : Formally, for λ ≤ λ′, the minimizer π∗(λ′) achieves: h(λ′, π ∗(λ′)) ≤ h(λ′, π ∗(λ)) , which gives 

λ′[Lsafety (π∗(λ′)) − L safety (π∗(λ))] ≤ (1 − λ′)[ Leff (π∗(λ)) − L eff (π∗(λ′))] .Since the right-hand side captures the efficiency improvement from π∗(λ) to π∗(λ′), and the constraint 

Πδ is the same for both, the shift from λ to λ′ strictly rewards lower Lsafety in the objective, driving 

Lsafety (π∗(λ′)) ≤ L safety (π∗(λ)) at optimality, which gives the desired P (safe)( π∗ 

> ϕ′

, s ) ≥ P (safe)( π∗

> ϕ

, s ).

□

A.2 Proof of Lemma (Accountability Partition) 

See Section 3.4. The telescoping argument holds by induction on k. Base case k = 1 : w1 = αi1 (terminal), sum = αi1̸ = 1 in general. Correction: for k = 1 , there is no delegation chain longer than one hop, so w1 = 1 by definition (the single agent bears all accountability). For k ≥ 2, the telescoping sum Pk−1 

> j=1

(Q 

> ℓ≤j

αℓ)(1 − αj+1 ) + Qkℓ=1 αℓ = 1 − Qkℓ=1 αℓ + Qkℓ=1 αℓ = 1 . □

# B Extended Experimental Details 

B.1 MIMIC-III Preprocessing Details 

Lab item IDs used: 50912 (Creatinine), 50971 (Potassium), 50983 (Sodium), 51006 (Urea Nitrogen), 51221 (Hematocrit), 51222 (Hemoglobin), 51265 (Platelet Count), 51301 (WBC), 50802 (Base Excess), 50821 (pO2). Values are mean-aggregated per admission and StandardScaler-normalized. APACHE-II is proxied by total ICU length of stay. Allergy classes: penicillin, sulfa, NSAID, ACE inhibitor, beta blocker. Specialist label: ICD-9 prefix mapping (4xx → cardiology, 5xx →pulmonology, 58x →nephrology, else →general). 

B.2 S&P 500 Feature Engineering 

State vector: 7 features (mean 30d return, std 30d return, mean 30d vol, std 30d vol, mean z-score, std z-score, portfolio realized vol), zero-padded to STATE DIM=64. Portfolio volatility: 30-day realized annualized. COVID stress test: Feb 20 – Mar 23, 2020 (peak-to-trough S&P 500 drawdown −33.9%). 

B.3 ASSISTments Feature Engineering 

Knowledge estimate: BKT-style EMA with P (learn) = 0 .20 , P (forget) = 0 .05 , initialized at 0.5. Skill difficulty: 1 − ¯p(correct) , z-scored across skills. Interaction window: last 20 interactions per student. Student–level train/val/test split (no data leakage): 70/15/15 by user id. 15 References 

Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017. Justice Owusu Agyemang, Jerry John Kponyo, Obed Kwasi Somuah, Elliot Amponsah, Godfred Manu Addo Boakye, and Kwame Opuni-Boachie Obour Agyekum. HiveMind: OS-inspired scheduling for concurrent LLM agent workloads. arXiv:2604.17111, 2026. Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes . Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1999. Anthropic. Agent skills specification. https://agentskills.io/specification , 2025. Amir Beck. First-Order Methods in Optimization . SIAM, 2017. Xin-Qiang Cai, Wei Wang, Feng Liu, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Reinforcement learning with verifiable yet noisy rewards under imperfect verifiers. arXiv:2510.00915, 2025. Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. A Lyapunov-based approach to safe reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2018. Chen Feng, Minghe Shen, Ananth Balashankar, Carsten Gerner-Beuerle, and Miguel R. D. Rodrigues. Noisy but valid: Robust statistical evaluation of LLMs with imperfect judges. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. arXiv:2601.20913. Mingyu Feng, Neil Heffernan, and Kenneth Koedinger. Addressing the assessment challenge with an online system that tutors as it assesses. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 19(3), 2009. Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017. Luca Franceschi, Paolo Frasconi, Saverio Salzo, Riccardo Grazzi, and Massimiliano Pontil. Bilevel pro-gramming for hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2018. Wenbo Gao, Renxi Liu, Xian Wang, Fang Guo, Shuai Yang, Xi Chen, Hui-Ling Zhen, Hanting Chen, Weizhe Lin, Xiaosong Li, and Yaoyuan Wang. AgentCollab: A self-evaluation-driven collaboration paradigm for efficient LLM agents. arXiv:2603.26034, 2026. Edward Grefenstette, Brandon Amos, Denis Yarats, Phu Mon Htut, Artem Molchanov, Franziska Meier, Douwe Kiela, Kyunghyun Cho, and Soumith Chintala. Generalized inner loop meta-learning. arXiv:1910.01727, 2019. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Chenyi Huang, Haoting Zhang, Jingxu Xu, Zeyu Zheng, and Yunduan Lin. Bilevel optimization of agent skills via Monte Carlo tree search. arXiv:2604.15709, 2026. 16 Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-Wei H. Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G. Mark. MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific Data , 3, 2016. Xiaoxiao Li. When single-agent with skills replace multi-agent systems and when they fail. arXiv:2601.04748, 2026. Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. Yi Liu, Weizhe Wang, Ruitao Feng, Yao Zhang, Guangquan Xu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, and Leo Zhang. Agent skills in the wild: An empirical study of security vulnerabilities at scale. arXiv:2601.10338, 2026. Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by implicit differentiation. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , 2020. Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T. Le, Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei Han, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. ReasoningBank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. arXiv:2509.25140, 2025. Sunil Prakash. LDP: An identity-aware protocol for multi-agent LLM systems. arXiv:2603.08852, 2026a. Sunil Prakash. The provenance paradox in multi-agent LLM routing: Delegation contracts and attested identity in LDP. arXiv:2603.18043, 2026b. Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1910.01708, 2019. David Schmotz, Sahar Abdelnabi, and Maksym Andriushchenko. Agent skills enable a new class of realistic and trivially simple prompt injections. arXiv:2510.26328, 2025. Jianshu She. AgentRM: An OS-inspired resource manager for LLM agent systems. arXiv:2603.13110, 2026. Nenad Tomaˇ sev, Matija Franklin, and Simon Osindero. Intelligent AI delegation. arXiv:2602.11865, 2026. Eric Wallace, Kai Xiao, Reimar Leike, Lilian Weng, Johannes Heidecke, and Alex Beutel. The instruction hierarchy: Training LLMs to prioritize privileged instructions. arXiv:2404.13208, 2024. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Wei Yang, Defu Cao, Jiacheng Pang, Muyan Weng, and Yan Liu. Adaptive collaboration with humans: Metacognitive policy optimization for multi-agent LLMs with continual learning. arXiv:2603.07972, 2026. Haoran Ye, Xuning He, Vincent Arak, Haonan Dong, and Guojie Song. Meta context engineering via agentic skill evolution. arXiv:2601.21557, 2026. 17 Guibin Zhang, Luyang Niu, Junfeng Fang, Kun Wang, Lei Bai, and Xiang Wang. Multi-agent architecture search via agentic supernet. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Spotlight , 2025. arXiv:2502.04180. Kunlun Zhu, Zijia Liu, Bingxuan Li, Muxin Tian, Yingxuan Yang, and Jiaxun Zhang. Where LLM agents fail and how they can learn from failures. arXiv:2509.25370, 2025. 18