Title: GRAIL: Autonomous Concept Grounding for Neuro-Symbolic Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16871v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:35:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# GRAIL: A UTONOMOUS CONCEPT GROUNDING FOR 

# NEURO -S YMBOLIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

Hikaru Shindo ∗

Technical University of Darmstadt 

Henri R¨ oßler 

Technical University of Darmstadt 

Quentin Delfosse 

Technical University of Darmstadt Google Intrinsic 

Kristian Kersting 

Technical University of Darmstadt hessian.AI German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt 

# ABSTRACT 

Neuro-symbolic Reinforcement Learning (NeSy-RL) combines symbolic reasoning with gradient-based optimization to achieve interpretable and generalizable policies. Relational concepts—such as “left of” or “close by”—serve as foundational building blocks that structure how agents per-ceive and act. However, conventional approaches require human experts to manually define these concepts, limiting adaptability since concept semantics vary across environments. We pro-pose GRAIL (Grounding Relational Agents through Interactive Learning), a framework that au-tonomously grounds relational concepts through environmental interaction. GRAIL leverages large language models (LLMs) to provide generic concept representations as weak supervision, then re-fines them to capture environment-specific semantics. This approach addresses both sparse reward signals and concept misalignment prevalent in underdetermined environments. Experiments on the Atari games Kangaroo , Seaquest , and Skiing demonstrate that GRAIL matches or outperforms agents with manually crafted concepts in simplified settings, and reveals informative trade-offs be-tween reward maximization and high-level goal completion in the full environment. 

# 1 Introduction 

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable progress in recent years, driving advancements in critical fields such as autonomous driving and robotics. Deep neural networks, capable of learning policies across diverse tasks without prior domain knowledge [1–4], have thus become the foundation of modern RL. Despite their success, these black-box models are prone to shortcut learning, exploiting action strategies that may be imperceptible to humans [5, 6]. For instance, in Atari Pong, deep RL agents often gravitate toward behavior that focuses on the opponent’s position instead of tracking the ball [7], demonstrating limited generalization when the environment is altered even slightly. To overcome the limitations of neural approaches, RL has increasingly incorporated symbolic reasoning through logic-based policies [8–11] and programmatic frameworks [12–16]. These methodologies offer transparency, revisability, enhanced generalization, and facilitate curriculum learning. Nevertheless, they remain heavily dependent on human-provided inductive biases—requiring domain experts to hard-code essential concepts or logic rules—and often struggle to capture fine-grained, low-level behaviors. This reliance fundamentally constrains the flexibility and expressiveness of symbolic systems. Research in philosophy and cognitive science has long maintained that human generalization capabilities stem from the ability to perceive the world through concepts [17, 18]. Concepts represent abstract attributes or relations common across sets of entities [19]; for example, by color, shape, or positional relation to others. While concept learning has been explored in visual reasoning tasks such as Visual Question Answering [20–22] and robotic manipulation [23], 

> ∗

Correspondence: hikaru.shindo@tu-darmstadt.de 

Preprint 1

> arXiv:2604.16871v1 [cs.AI] 18 Apr 2026

Player is on the left of the ladder. Player is on the left of the diver. Player is on the left of the flags. Figure 1: Concept grounding is environment-dependent in neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning. The spatial concept “left of” requires different interpretations across environments. In Kangaroo (left), the agent must verify that the player is both horizontally left of the ladder and vertically aligned on the same platform. In Seaquest (middle), “left of” is defined more flexibly based on horizontal positioning regardless of vertical alignment. In Skiing (right), the relation is computed relative to the midpoint between flags rather than individual flag objects. While humans intuitively adapt these conceptual meanings to context, existing neuro-symbolic RL frameworks rely on manually hard-coded valuation functions for each environment [25], severely limiting their scalability and adaptability to novel domains. grounding concepts in RL tasks remains relatively uncharted. Current RL approaches bypass this by manually spec-ifying grounding functions [8, 11, 24, 25], a practice feasible in simple domains but impractical when facing greater complexity or relational structure involving multiple objects. Figure 1 illustrates this necessity across three Atari environments. Here, the agent must dynamically ground the “left of” relationship in different contexts: in Kangaroo (left), “left of ladder” entails being to the left of a ladder and on the same platform; in Seaquest (middle), “left of diver” simply means to the left of a diver irrespective of vertical alignment; in Skiing (right), “left of flags” requires identifying flags ahead and computing one’s position relative to them. Currently, these varied conceptual groundings are hard-coded, which limits adaptability to new environments. This fundamental challenge raises an important research question: How can an agent learn to ground relational concepts autonomously through environment interactions? 

To address this, we propose GRAIL (Grounding Relational Agents through Interactive Learning), a novel framework that enables agents to ground relational concepts via experience. GRAIL builds upon BlendRL [25], which employs a hybrid policy architecture—combining symbolic logic rules and differentiable neural networks—trained jointly with differentiable forward reasoning [26, 27]. In BlendRL, each symbolic predicate is associated with a differentiable function that computes truth values over state observations, allowing the overall policy to seamlessly bind symbolic and neural reasoning. GRAIL extends this by introducing a new method for concept grounding within the BlendRL framework, allowing each concept to be learned and adapted to its specific environment. Crucially, GRAIL leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to provide general, high-level descriptions of concepts as weak supervision signals. For example, the LLM supplies a prototypical representation of “left,” which GRAIL then uses alongside environment feedback to train differentiable functions that maximize reward and align their outputs with the LLM-provided signal. This is accomplished by adding a novel loss term to the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [2] objective, encouraging alignment between learned concept groundings and guidance from LLMs. Our experiments in the Atari environments Kangaroo, Seaquest, and Skiing demonstrate that GRAIL matches or outperforms both neural and neuro-symbolic baselines in a simplified setting, successfully discovering task-optimal concept groundings directly from interaction. As illustrated in Figure 2, GRAIL learns fundamentally different ground-ings of “left” and “right” depending on the environment—horizontal platform-aligned concepts in Kangaroo versus anticipatory diagonal concepts in Skiing. In summary, our core contributions are: • We introduce GRAIL 2, a framework that enables neuro-symbolic agents to ground relational concepts through environment interaction. GRAIL extends BlendRL by learning spatial relational concepts au-tonomously, using LLMs to provide high-level concept representations as weak supervision. The resulting policies are highly interpretable, expressed as first-order logic rules over the learned concepts. 

> 2Code is available at: https://github.com/ml-research/grail

2GRAIL 

## on left on right on left on right 

GRAIL 

## Kangaroo Skiing learned concepts learned concepts Figure 2: GRAIL learns environment-specific concept groundings. Given different environments, GRAIL au-tonomously discovers distinct interpretations of “left” and “right.” In Kangaroo (left), the learned concepts activate along horizontal bands aligned with each platform, reflecting that “left of ladder” requires both horizontal offset and vertical alignment. In Skiing (right), activation extends diagonally above each flag, capturing the anticipatory nature of steering decisions during downhill movement. These heatmaps demonstrate that GRAIL adapts abstract relational concepts to the specific spatial structure of each environment. • We formulate Concept Alignment as a novel regularization term for PPO-based policy learning, encoding the degree to which the agent’s learned concepts align with LLM-generated proxy functions. The resulting GRAIL learning framework navigates the inherent trade-off between reward maximization and semantically faithful concept grounding, and is among the first to discover spatial concept representations in this setting. • We evaluate GRAIL on three challenging Atari environments: Kangaroo, Seaquest, and Skiing, which have not previously been tackled by neuro-symbolic agents without hard-coded relational concepts. We demon-strate that GRAIL matches or outperforms both the state-of-the-art neuro-symbolic baseline and a purely neu-ral PPO baseline. Furthermore, we qualitatively analyze the relational concepts learned by GRAIL agents, showing that they acquire meaningful spatial groundings from experience without concept-level supervision. 

# 2 Background 

GRAIL builds on several foundational research areas, briefly reviewed in this section. 

2.1 Deep Reinforcement Learning 

We model the environment as a Markov decision process (MDP), M = ⟨S , A, P, R, γ ⟩. The objective is to learn a policy πθ (at | st) that maximizes the expected discounted return: 

J(θ) = Eπθ

" TX

> t=0

γtrt

#

(1) where γ ∈ [0 , 1] is the discount factor and T is the episode length. 

2.1.1 Proximal Policy Optimization. 

GRAIL optimizes policies using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [2] actor-critic method, that maintains both a policy (actor) πθ and a value function (critic) Vϕ, evaluating the actor’s decisions. PPO estimates the advantage of each action using Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE): 

ˆAGAE( γ,λ ) 

> t

=

> T

X

> i=0

(γλ )iδ(1)  

> t+i

(2) where δ(1)  

> t

= rt + γV ϕ(st+1 ) − Vϕ(st) is the one-step TD residual and λ controls the bias-variance trade-off. The policy is then updated by maximizing the following clipped surrogate objective: 

LCLIP (θ) = E(s,a )∼πθold 

h

min 



rt(θ) ˆAt, clip ( rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

i 

(3) where rt(θ) = πθ (at | st)/π θold (at | st) is the probability ratio between the current and previous policy, and ϵ is a clipping coefficient that constrains updates to a trust region, enabling stable reuse of experience data across multiple gradient steps. 3𝑣 !

> "#$% _'$

𝑣 !

> ("')# _*+
> 0.1: left_of( player ,ladder1 )
> 0.9: left_of( player ,monkey )
> …
> 0.2: close_by( player ,ladder1 )
> 0.7: close_by( player ,monkey )
> …

Input State 

State Atoms 

Valuation 

Functions 

Object -Centric State 

> Compute objects’ relationships

Figure 3: Valuation functions evaluate relationships between objects. These functions are typically hard-coded, limiting the applicability of neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning. GRAIL aims to learn these functions by aligning them with the correct concept directly from interactions with the environment. 

2.2 Neuro-Symbolic Reinforcement Learning 

GRAIL specifically builds upon the ideas of neuro-symbolic reasoning and learning with first-order logic. 

2.2.1 First-Order Logic. 

GRAIL uses First-Order Logic (FOL) to encode world knowledge and actions in a logical and structured manner. A language in FOL, L = ( P, F, D, V), comprises predicate symbols P, functors F, constants D and variables V.An atom p(t1, . . . , tn) is the smallest unit in a logical statement, where t1, . . . , tn are terms and p is a predicate of arity 

α(p) = n. Ground atoms (with only constant terms) have truth values. A Horn clause takes the form A :- B1, . . . , B n,where A is the head and {B1, . . . , B n} is the body , meaning if all body atoms are true, then A must hold. 

2.2.2 Logic for Actions. 

GRAIL adopts first-order logic as the core language for representing both actions and states, enabling explicit rea-soning throughout the agent’s learning process with the logic programming framework [28]. This perspective traces back to foundational work on logical reasoning about actions [29]; GRAIL follows and extends recent neuro-symbolic efforts such as [11] by structuring policies with weighted first-order logic rules. The predicate set P is split into action predicates (PA) and state predicates (PS ). This separation empowers the agent to distinguish what it can do from what it can know about the world. The resulting Action-State Language is defined by 

(PA, PS , D, V). For illustration, consider the Kangaroo environment (Figure 1), where action predicates may include 

PA = {go left , go right , jump , idle }, while state predicates could be PS = {left of , closeby , . . . }. An action rule takes the form XA:-X(1)  

> S

, . . . , X (n) 

> S

—the action is taken when all body conditions hold. For example, “move right if left of a ladder”: 

> go_right(O1):-type(O1,agent),type(O2,ladder),left_of(O1,O2).

2.2.3 Differentiable Reasoning for RL. 

GRAIL is built upon differentiable logic programming [26, 27, 30], in which logical reasoning is realized through differentiable tensor operations, enabling end-to-end gradient-based optimization of symbolic representations. Figure 3 illustrates the computational flow. Raw states are first transformed into object-centric representations, where each object is described by its attributes ( e.g. , type, x- and y-coordinates). These representations are then processed by valuation functions —differentiable parameterized functions that estimate the confidence of each state atom. For example, vleft of  

> ψ

computes a soft confidence score for the left of predicate given a pair of objects. The outputs of these valuation functions form a weighted set of ground atoms that feed into the symbolic policy reasoning. While valuation functions have traditionally been hand-crafted, limiting applicability and scalability, GRAIL provides a unified framework to learn them directly from environment interaction while encouraging alignment with seman-tically meaningful concepts. Because the entire reasoning pipeline is differentiable, GRAIL can optimize concept representations end-to-end via policy gradient methods, jointly improving task performance and concept quality. 43 Related Work 

GRAIL is built upon neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning, concept learning, and object-centric representation learn-ing. We review each area and position our contributions accordingly. 

3.1 Neuro-Symbolic RL 

Relational Reinforcement Learning (Relational RL) [31–37] leverages logical representations and probabilistic reason-ing to address RL challenges in structured, relational domains. The Neural Logic Reinforcement Learning (NLRL) framework [8] is a pioneering effort to introduce Differentiable Inductive Logic Programming ( ∂ILP) [26] into RL. Here, ∂ILP facilitates the learning of generalized logic rules from examples using gradient-based optimization. NUDGE [11] builds further by incorporating neurally-guided symbolic abstraction, drawing on significant progress in differentiable logic programming [27, 38] to learn more complex programs. BlendRL [25] subsequently extends these ideas, combining symbolic and neural policies within a unified framework. While these approaches demonstrate the effectiveness of learning logic-based policies, they share a common limitation: the reliance on manually specified relational predicates, including explicit definitions of their semantics to compute confidence scores. As a result, adapting such methods to novel environments typically requires considerable manual effort to define suitable predicates and their underlying grounding functions. In contrast, GRAIL overcomes this bot-tleneck by automatically learning the grounding of relational predicates—i.e., the valuation functions that define their semantics—directly from environment interaction, thus substantially broadening the applicability of neuro-symbolic RL. 

3.2 Concept Learning 

Learning concepts is a fundamental challenge in artificial intelligence and machine learning. Modeling concepts explicitly in the machine learning pipeline enhances interpretability and generalization of data-driven models [39–42]. Neuro-symbolic methods address this challenge by learning concepts from experience with symbolic programs [22], with an emphasis on complex visual reasoning with multiple objects and relations [20, 21, 43–47]. However, these works focus on concept understanding in perception tasks or question answering; concept grounding in RL settings— i.e. , learning what relational predicates mean through environment interaction—remains underexplored. GRAIL learns to ground relational concepts through interaction, guided by weak supervision from LLMs. GRAIL draws on classical formalisms for describing concepts and actions abstractly. Allen’s interval algebra [48] provides a qualitative calculus over temporal intervals; the spatial predicates learned by GRAIL can be viewed as a continuous, learned counterpart of such qualitative relations. Furthermore, action languages grounded in first-order and second-order logic have long been used to specify actions in planning and reinforcement learning [29]. GRAIL follows the same tradition, representing policies as logic rules whose head atoms correspond to the actions executed by the agent. 

3.3 Object-Centric RL 

Object-centric decomposition is a fundamental pillar for achieving task generalization in reinforcement learning [6]. Object-centric reinforcement learning agents first need to transform unstructured state representations by decomposing visual inputs into object-centric states [49–52]. These structured representations are increasingly integrated into RL pipelines, improving compositional generalization in model-free policies [53–55] and enabling complex relational reasoning via object-level latent dynamics in model-based architectures [56–60]. In the Atari domain, extracting such entity-level ground truth from raw pixels or RAM remains a fundamental challenge [61, 62]. To bridge this gap, recent approaches leverage pre-trained visual segmentations to construct sample-efficient spatial-temporal world models directly within these complex arcade environments [59, 63]. 

# 4 GRAIL: Learning to Ground Relational Concepts 

GRAIL extends BlendRL [25] by replacing its hand-crafted valuation functions with learnable differentiable ground-ing functions, guided by LLM-generated proxy concepts as weak supervision. In the following, we outline the limita-tions of BlendRL’s manual grounding and describe our proposed advances. An overview of our approach is provided in Figure 4. The BlendRL framework trains neuro-symbolic policies to maximize expected reward using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [2]. In this setup, the logic policy is represented 5Large 

Language 

Model       

> on left on right close by …Environmental
> Instruction
> left_of right_of close_by …
> Neuro -Symbolic Policy
> 0.9: go_right(): -left_of(agent,ladder).
> 0.6: fire(): -close_by(agent,enemy).
> …

# Concept Alignment Module 

# BlendRL 

Concept 

Alignment 

Loss 

PPO 

Loss  

> Maximize the reward
> Align the concepts
> : concept activation w.r.t the relative position : gradient signal
> : agent
> Generic Concept Representations

Figure 4: GRAIL: Framework Overview. GRAIL extends the BlendRL framework [25], uniting neural and logic-based policies within a neuro-symbolic RL agent. Here, the logic policy consists of weighted rules expressed over predicates, where each predicate is equipped with a differentiable valuation function capturing abstract state relations. Unlike BlendRL, which relies on hand-crafted predicate valuations, GRAIL introduces concept alignment : it leverages large language models (LLMs) to extract generic concept representations and incorporates a dedicated loss term that encourages the learned valuation functions to match these LLM-derived proxies. In this depiction, the spatial relations between agents and objects are visualized—purple areas indicate the normalized outputs of the corresponding valua-tion functions, i.e. , the concept activations with respect to the relative positions of objects. as a set of weighted rules over predicates, with each predicate associated with a differentiable valuation function to capture abstract state relations. A central challenge arises in learning these spatial relations: aligning each predicate with its intended concept—the well-known symbol grounding problem —is nontrivial. As a result, naively implementing predicates as neural networks and optimizing solely for reward frequently leads to poor or uninterpretable alignments. To address both reward maximization and robust concept alignment, we introduce a concept grounding mechanism, depicted at the top of Figure 4. This module leverages a large language model (LLM) to extract general representations of relevant concepts, informed by environmental instructions that succinctly describe the task and domain. In essence, the LLM generates proxy representations for each concept (for example, specifying what “left” should look like in general). GRAIL then grounds these general, LLM-derived representations to the specifics of a given environment (such as Kangaroo), refining them through interaction and reward maximization. While a generic “left” representation may not initially yield high performance, GRAIL improves this by learning to adapt and refine concept valuations according to environmental feedback. This allows the agent to achieve both generalization across tasks and strong environment-specific performance. Crucially, this introduces an inherent trade-off: too strong an alignment signal constrains the agent to the LLM’s generic priors and can impede reward maximization, while too weak a signal leaves the agent susceptible to degenerate or semantically meaningless groundings. We address this tension through an annealing schedule and a tunable alignment coefficient. 

4.1 The Hybrid Policy Reasoning and Learning 

GRAIL inherits the hybrid policy architecture from BlendRL [25], which combines neural and symbolic policies trained jointly. We summarize this inherited architecture below for completeness. The input state is represented by both a pixel-based and a symbolic representation, and the policy reasoning is depicted in Figure 5. 6on right of ladder 

> close by monkey

Raw State 

Object -Centric State 

> Logic
> Policy
> Relation
> Detection
> Module
> Neural
> Policy

𝜋 !

> "#$%&

𝜋 '

> ()*+,"
> Blending
> Module
> Final Action
> Distribution
> Concept
> Grounder

𝑣 -

> .

Figure 5: GRAIL’s Policy Reasoning. A concept grounding module takes object-centric features Z extracted from an image X and computes object relations via differentiable valuation functions vp 

> ψ

. Those are then applied to a set of logical rules through forward reasoning to determine a logic policy . Likewise, a blending module utilizes the relational information to combine the logic policy with a neural policy that operates on the sub-symbolic state. All components can be trained jointly. 

Hybrid State Representations. GRAIL agents utilize two complementary forms of state representation: (i) pixel-based representations , and (ii) object-centric representations . The former comprise stacks of raw images directly provided by the environment and typically processed via convolutional neural networks [64]. The latter are extracted using object discovery models [50, 52, 65, 66] and consist of structured lists of objects with associated attributes ( e.g. ,position, orientation, color), enabling explicit logical reasoning [67–71]. Alternatively, these states can be systemati-cally extracted if supported by the environment. In the case of Atari, OCAtari [61] accomplishes this by reading the internal RAM state to produce structured object data. Formally, the raw (sub-symbolic) state is denoted as X ∈ RF ×W ×H×C , representing the most recent F frames of width W , height H, and C channels. The symbolic (object-centric) state is denoted as Z ∈ Rn×m, where n is the number of detected objects and m is the number of extracted properties per object. 

Hybrid Policy Reasoning. Given both object-centric and pixel-based state representations, GRAIL conducts parallel neural and symbolic policy inference, and seamlessly combines their outputs through a blending mechanism. This hybrid policy reasoning is composed of three main components: 1. Neural Policy: πneu : RF ×W ×H×C → [0 , 1] A. This module is a neural network with parameters θ, produc-ing a probability distribution over actions from the pixel-based input X. Standard implementations utilize convolutional neural networks [2, 64, 72], though visual transformers [73, 74] are equally compatible. 2. Logic Policy: πlog : Rn×m → [0 , 1] A. Parameterized by ϕ, this component is a differentiable forward reasoner [27, 38] operating on object-centric representations (as visualized in Figure 5). Policies are specified using FOL rules, where each rule comprises a head atom (the action ) and body atoms (the state predicates 

serving as preconditions) [11, 29]. 3. Blending Module: This component, parameterized by λ, is a differentiable function that computes a soft weighting between the neural and logic policies. The blender can be realized as either an explicit logic-based function ( Bλ : RF ×n×m → [0 , 1] ), an implicit neural network ingester of pixel states ( Bλ : RF ×W ×H×C →

[0 , 1] ), or a hybrid of both. While logic-based blending is inherently interpretable, it presumes the presence of sufficient inductive biases—if these are absent, a neural blending approach may be preferable for adaptivity. The agent’s final action distribution is obtained by blending the neural and logic policies: 

π = β · πneu (X) + (1 − β) · πlog (Z), (4) where β = Bλ(Z) ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the blending weight inferred from the current symbolic (object-centric) state, πneu 

is parameterized by θ, and πlog by ϕ. All modules of the agent are optimized jointly using PPO. 7To compute value estimates, separate critics process the respective state modalities: the neural critic , V neu :

RW ×H×C → R, for sub-symbolic states, and the logic critic , V log : RE×D → R, for symbolic states. These are then blended analogously: 

V = β · V neu (X) + (1 − β) · V log (Z). (5) 

Policy Optimization. Policy optimization in our framework builds upon the standard PPO objective (Eq. 3), which comprises loss terms for the value function, clipped policy ratio, and action entropy regularization. To further en-courage the agent to leverage both neural and logic policies, we adopt and extend the BlendRL regularization for blending: 

H(Bλ) = −β · log β − (1 − β) · log(1 − β) (6) This blender entropy quantifies the uncertainty or diversity in the blending coefficient β, which softly allocates control between the neural ( β) and logic ( 1 − β) policies. By encouraging higher entropy, the agent is discouraged from fully collapsing onto either policy and is instead incentivized to employ them both as appropriate for the state. The final BlendRL loss function, which we denote LBlendRL , thus takes the following form: 

LBlendRL = E

h

cVF · LVF − LCLIP − cAE · H(π) − cBE · H(Bλ)

i

(7) where LVF is the mean-squared value function error, LCLIP is the clipped surrogate objective (Eq. 3), H(π) is the action entropy, and H(Bλ) is the blender entropy defined above. The coefficients cVF , cAE , and cBE weight the respective terms. All components operate on the hybrid policy π and value function V as defined above. 

The Concept-Grounding Bottleneck. Up to this point, we have presented the hybrid policy reasoning approach, which enables agents to reason abstractly and perform reactive decision-making. However, a central limitation of this framework is its dependence on user-supplied concept grounding, specifically the requirement for hand-crafted valuation functions to define predicates such as “left.” This reliance restricts the framework’s applicability across different environments, since concepts like “left” can have varying semantics depending on context, as illustrated in Figure 1. To overcome this challenge, we introduce a concept grounding module that leverages large language models (LLMs) to automatically generate proxy functions for each extensional predicate. LLMs offer generic, intuitive representations of concepts, serving as a form of conceptual prior knowledge about how these predicates are commonly understood. By incorporating LLM-generated proxies, GRAIL augments the BlendRL framework with an additional source of su-pervision—referred to as concept alignment —that guides the learning of environment-specific grounding for abstract concepts. 

4.2 Grounding Spatial Concepts in Environments 

Learning to ground abstract concepts within specific environments is a crucial capability of our neuro-symbolic ar-chitecture. Concept grounding refers to the process by which abstract, symbolic predicates—such as left of or 

close by —are mapped to context-dependent, observable, object-centric features obtained from the environment. In GRAIL, this is achieved through the learning of differentiable valuation functions that output soft truth values for each predicate by processing the relational configuration of detected objects. Rather than relying on static, hand-crafted rules, we employ parameterized and differentiable functions to evaluate spatial relational predicates. A simplistic method might use a shallow MLP that consumes the absolute positions of objects as input, but this generally fails to capture important invariances and generalization capabilities required in diverse environments. Three critical desiderata guide our improved design: 1. Translation Invariance: Spatial relationships should not be affected by the simultaneous translation of all involved objects. Thus, we use relative coordinates, such as differences (x1 −xj , y 1 −yj ), instead of absolute positions. 2. Normalization: We normalize these coordinate differences by the width and height of the scene, ensuring all offset vectors   x1−xj 

> W

, y1−yj

> H

 are scaled to [−1, 1] 2. This supports robustness to varying scene sizes. 3. Generality: Although the logic programs in Figure 6 employ only binary spatial relations, our framework is designed to handle predicates of arbitrary arity. Accordingly, we replace the hand-crafted spatial valuation functions in BlendRL with differentiable, parameterized valuation functions vp 

> ψ

: [ −1, 1] 2 → [0 , 1] , implemented as neural networks and trained jointly with the rest of the 8(a) Policy Programs 

> up_ladder(X) :-on_ladder(P,L), same_level_ladder(P,L). right_ladder(X) :-left_of_ladder(P,L), same_level_ladder(P,L). left_ladder(X) :-right_of_ladder(P,L), same_level_ladder(P,L). up_air(X) :-oxygen_low(B). up_rescue(X) :-full_divers(X). left_to_diver(X) :-right_of_diver(P,D), visible_diver(D), not_full_divers(X). right_to_diver(X) :-left_of_diver(P,D), visible_diver(D), not_full_divers(X). up_to_diver(X) :-deeper_than_diver(P,D), visible_diver(D), not_full_divers(X). down_to_diver(X) :-higher_than_diver(P,D), visible_diver(D), not_full_divers(X). left_to_flag(X) :-right_of_flag(P,F), right_oriented(P). right_to_flag(X) :-left_of_flag(P,F), left_oriented(P). noop(X) :-right_of_flag(P,F), left_of_flag(P,R), straight_oriented(P).

(b) Blending Programs 

> neural_agent(X) :-close_by_monkey(P,M). neural_agent(X) :-close_by_throwncoconut(P,TC). logic_agent(X) :-nothing_around(X). neural_agent(X) :-close_by_enemy(P,E). neural_agent(X) :-close_by_missile(P,M). logic_agent(X) :-visible_diver(D). logic_agent(X) :-oxygen_low(B). logic_agent(X) :-full_divers(X). logic_agent(X) :-true(X).

Figure 6: Logic programs used by (a) the logic actor and (b) the blending module in three Atari environments, generated by LLMs following [25]. Unlike previous studies, where spatial predicates are hand-crafted by human experts, GRAIL grounds these predicates as parameterized differentiable functions. In Skiing, the blending program always delegates to the logic agent. architecture. Given a binary spatial predicate p relating a reference object (object 1, typically the player) at position 

(x1, y 1) to a second object at position (x2, y 2), the valuation function takes normalized relative coordinates as input: 

vp

> ψ

 x1 − x2

W , y1 − y2

H



∈ [0 , 1] , (8) where W and H denote the width and height of the scene, respectively. The normalized relative coordinates   x1−x2 

> W

, y1−y2

> H

 ∈ [−1, 1] 2 ensure translation invariance and robustness to varying scene sizes. While all spatial predicates in our experiments are binary, this formulation naturally extends to n-ary predicates by concatenating the normalized offsets for each additional object. By optimizing the PPO-based BlendRL loss (Eq. 7) with respect to the parameters ψ, the agent is able to maximize reward by flexibly adapting its concept representations—effectively grounding abstract predicates to the specific spatial and contextual nuances of each environment. 

4.3 Aligning Concepts with Semantic Priors 

While agents can learn to ground spatial concepts through trainable mechanisms, this alone does not guarantee that the resulting representations capture their correct semantic intent. For instance, the agent may confuse “left” with “right,” as there is nothing intrinsic in the learning process to prevent these concepts from being systematically swapped. This ongoing difficulty illustrates the classic symbolic grounding problem. To overcome this limitation, we introduce the concept aligner as an essential component of our framework. Concept alignment refers to refining the agent’s learned, environment-specific concepts so they align with external semantic priors or generic conceptual knowledge—such as proxy functions derived from large language models (LLMs). By utilizing such weak supervision, the concept aligner encourages the learned valuation functions to faithfully represent the intended meanings of each concept. Specifically, we employ LLMs to extract generic knowledge about spatial relations (e.g., how “left” should be inter-preted in an abstract sense) and use this information to guide the alignment of learned valuation functions. Introducing this additional supervisory signal helps ensure that the agent’s internal representations are better aligned with uni-versal, human-interpretable semantics. While integrating humans in the loop can provide high-quality, interpretable 9# Your Role 

> You are a model that determines whether a player
> in the Atari game Kangaroo is left of a ladder such
> that the player can go right to reach the ladder…

Input Prompt def left_of_ ladder (dx, dy):   

> # Condition 1: player is left of the ladder
> left_condition = dx < 0
> # Condition 2: player is roughly aligned
> vertically with the ladder (on same platform)
> vertical_alignment = dy.abs() <= 8
> # Both conditions must be true
> result = left_condition &
> vertical_alignment
> return result.float()

Generated Code Snippet on left 

Step 1: Generate Proxy Function via LLMs 

LLM 

Training Steps 

𝑣 ! 

> "#$%

𝑣 !

> "#$%

𝑣 ! 

> "#$%

𝑣 !

> "#$%

…

Step 2: Policy Learning Supervise to 

align concepts 

# 𝐿 !" 

randomly 

initialized 

concept 

aligned 

concept Figure 7: GRAIL maximizes reward and aligns concepts semantically. Step 1: We generate proxy functions for each spatial predicate using LLMs. These functions are represented as normalized activation maps, typically produced as code snippets and visualized over the 2D state space. Step 2: The proxy functions are incorporated as an additional supervision signal during policy optimization. This auxiliary signal guides the agent to semantically align its learned valuation functions with human-intended concepts—for example, preventing systematic confusion between “left” and “right”. To achieve this, we introduce a binary cross-entropy loss LCA that explicitly encourages the learned valuation functions to match their corresponding proxy functions. feedback [75, 76], it is often costly—especially when agents learn continually from interactive experiences. Leverag-ing LLM-generated supervision thus significantly reduces the effort needed to obtain meaningful feedback. Figure 7 illustrates the overall concept aligner module. We begin by leveraging large language models (LLMs) to generate generic, environment-agnostic representations of spatial concepts—so-called proxy functions —by prompting the models with detailed descriptions of the task, relevant environmental features, and objectives. Concretely, the LLM produces executable Python code that implements each spatial predicate p as a proxy function gp : [ −1, 1] 2 → [0 , 1] ,mapping a 2D relative offset to a soft truth value. The logic programs that define the policy structure (Figure 6) are also generated by LLMs following Shindo et al. [25]. These resulting proxy functions act as semantic priors, providing abstract “templates” of the intended meanings for each spatial relation. Throughout the reinforcement learning process, these proxy functions are used as an auxiliary supervision signal: as the agent optimizes its actions for reward, the learned valuation functions are concurrently encouraged to align with the proxy functions. This coupling helps ensure that the agent’s internal concept representations remain faithful to human-understandable semantics. For example, if the agent’s policies incorrectly conflate the notions of “left” and “right,” the proxy functions will provide a corrective influence and steer the learned concepts toward the intended interpretation. It is important to emphasize, however, that using proxy functions alone results in suboptimal performance, since they are only generic and not adapted to the specific environment. Therefore, the process of grounding —adapting concepts to their environment—is essential. The alignment signal introduced by our approach substantially enhances this grounding by combining generic knowledge with environment-specific experience. We now detail how the concept aligner incorporates proxy functions into our framework. The core idea is to periodi-cally compare the agent’s learned valuation functions against the LLM-generated proxy functions over a dense grid of spatial offsets, and penalize any disagreement. Intuitively, this grid acts as a shared “canvas” on which both functions paint their activation maps; the concept alignment loss then measures how closely these two maps match for each predicate. 10 Concretely, we construct a K × K grid of offset vectors evenly distributed within the range [−1, 1] 2. For row r ∈{1, . . . , K } and column c ∈ { 1, . . . , K }:

∆xr,c = 2cK + 1 − 1, ∆yr,c = 2rK + 1 − 1. (9) At each training iteration, we evaluate both the learned valuation function vr,c = vp 

> ψ

(∆ xr,c , ∆yr,c ) and the corre-sponding proxy function ˆvr,c = gp(∆ xr,c , ∆yr,c ) at every grid point. The discrepancy between the learned concepts and the semantic priors is measured using the mean binary cross-entropy loss: 

LCA = 1

|P e|

X

> p∈P e

1

K2

X

> r,c

BCE(ˆ vr,c , v r,c ) (10) where Pe ⊂ P denotes the set of extensional predicates whose semantics are to be aligned. We choose binary cross-entropy (BCE) because both the learned valuation functions (sigmoid output) and the proxy functions produce values in [0 , 1] that can be interpreted as soft truth values. BCE directly penalizes pointwise deviations in these truth values, which is appropriate when the proxy provides a reasonable shape of the activation map. Alternative objectives, such as ranking losses (which preserve only relative orderings) or contrastive losses (which encourage separation between positive and negative regions), may be more robust when proxy magnitudes are unreliable. To integrate this semantic supervision into learning, we augment the original BlendRL objective (see Eq. 7) with our 

concept alignment loss LCA , yielding the following total objective: 

L = LBlendRL +



1 − γCA · tT



· cCA · LCA (11) Here, cCA ∈ R≥0 is the concept alignment coefficient , controlling the strength of the semantic prior, and t ∈ N

(0 ≤ t ≤ T ) is the current optimization step out of T total steps. The term γCA ∈ [0 , 1] is a scheduling hyperparameter that determines the rate at which the influence of LCA diminishes over training. A value of γCA = 1 leads the alignment loss to be annealed to zero by the end of training, while γCA = 0 keeps it constant throughout. This gradual attenuation reflects the role of the concept aligner: to provide helpful guidance during the early, ambiguous phase of training, but to allow final concept grounding to be informed primarily by environment-specific experience. We examine the impact of varying cCA and γCA in our ablation studies in our experiments. 

Relation between grounding and alignment. Concept grounding enables agents to learn what a concept means in a given environment, while concept alignment ensures that this learned meaning remains semantically faithful to its general, language-level interpretation. By balancing these two objectives, GRAIL produces policies that are both reward-maximizing and interpretable. 

# 5 Experiments 

We empirically assess our framework on a variety of Atari environments, focusing on both quantitative performance and the interpretability of learned spatial concepts. Our experimental study is structured to address the following research questions: 

Q1: Can GRAIL learn concept groundings that match the performance of hand-crafted valuation functions? 

Q2: Does GRAIL learn interpretable, environment-specific spatial concepts rather than simply replicating LLM proxies? 

Q3: Do GRAIL’s learned concepts transfer to the full neuro-symbolic setting, and how do they affect the trade-off between reward maximization and goal completion? 

Q4: What failure modes arise in learned concept grounding, and where does concept misalignment persist? 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

We compare GRAIL against two primary baselines: a neural baseline and a neuro-symbolic baseline. 

Baselines. As the neural baseline , we use a CNN-based PPO agent [2] with three convolutional layers (kernel sizes 8, 4, 3; strides 4, 2, 1), followed by a shared 512-dimensional fully connected layer for both the actor (18 actions) and critic (scalar value estimate). As the neuro-symbolic baseline , we use BlendRL [25], which has been shown 11 to outperform prior neuro-symbolic RL methods such as NUDGE [11] and NLRL [8]. Since GRAIL builds upon BlendRL by replacing its hand-crafted valuation functions with learned ones, this comparison directly isolates the effect of our concept grounding mechanism. In Stage 1, where the neural policy is disabled ( β = 0 ), BlendRL reduces to a purely logic-based policy akin to NUDGE; however, NUDGE was evaluated only on simpler environments and does not support learned valuation functions, precluding a direct comparison. For GRAIL, we generate proxy functions using two LLMs—Claude4-Sonnet [77] and GPT-4o [78]—yielding two GRAIL variants. 

Environments. We evaluate on three Atari environments from the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [79]: Kan-garoo, Seaquest, and Skiing. Each environment demands different spatial concepts—platform-relative navigation in Kangaroo, underwater pursuit and rescue in Seaquest, and anticipatory steering in Skiing—providing comple-mentary coverage of the challenges GRAIL addresses. Prior neuro-symbolic RL methods such as NLRL [8] and NUDGE [11] were evaluated on simpler or synthetic environments; Atari games pose a substantially harder test due to high-dimensional visual input, dynamic multi-object scenes, and sparse rewards. We use OCAtari [61] to extract object-centric features, representing each state in both pixel-based and object-centric modalities. 

Metrics. We report the average episodic return for quantitative comparison and the average goals achieved per episode to measure high-level task completion. We further provide qualitative analysis by visualizing the learned spatial concepts as heatmaps, allowing direct inspection of how GRAIL grounds relational predicates in each environ-ment. 

Training Protocol. We adopt a two-stage training protocol. BlendRL [25] first trains end-to-end in a single stage. This is only possible because its valuation functions are hand-crafted, effectively bypassing the concept learning prob-lem entirely. Since GRAIL must learn these functions, end-to-end training would require the agent to simultaneously learn two interdependent components: (1) the meaning of each concept via valuation functions, and (2) the importance of each logic rule whose predicates rely on those very concepts. This creates a circular dependency: the agent cannot determine which rules are useful without knowing what the predicates that compose these rules mean, yet the predi-cates receive gradient signal only through the rules. By first isolating concept learning in a simplified setting (Stage 1), we break this dependency and allow the valuation functions to converge to interpretable groundings before the full neuro-symbolic pipeline is trained (Stage 2). 

Stage 1: Logic Policy Training on Simplified Environment. We train only the logic policy and its valuation func-tions, disabling the neural policy ( β = 0 ) and removing all enemies, using HackAtari [80] tasks modifications. Rule weights in the symbolic policy remain fixed. Rewards are restricted to high-level achievements ( e.g. , reaching the child in Kangaroo or rescuing six divers in Seaquest). Episodes are capped at 3000 steps with updates every 4 steps, for a total of 10 million steps. 

Stage 2: Joint Neuro-Symbolic Training on Complete Environment. We freeze the learned valuation functions and train the neural policy and blending module from scratch in the full environment. The neural policy and blending weights are randomly initialized; only the spatial concept groundings are carried over from Stage 1. Enemies are reactivated, there is no episode length restriction, and updates use a step size of 1. The reward structure awards 20 points for level completion and 1 point for each other reward. This stage runs for 60 million steps. 

Optimization Details. All parameters are optimized using PPO with respect to the joint objective (Eq. 11). Each iteration samples 128 steps from the current policy across parallel environments. Advantages are estimated via GAE (Eq. 2) with γ = 0 .99 and λ = 0 .95 .The loss coefficients are cVF = 0 .5, cAE = 0 .01 , and cBE = 0 .01 , with clipping parameter ϵ = 0 .1. We use Adam with a linearly decayed learning rate from 2.5 × 10 −4 and gradient clipping at 0.5. Parameters are updated for 10 epochs per iteration with 32 parallel environments. We sweep over cCA ∈ { 0.03 , 0.1, 0.3, 1.0} and report results for the best-performing setting. 

# 6 Results 

We now present the empirical results for both training stages individually. 

6.1 Performance comparison on Atari environments 

To address Q1 , we evaluate agents on the Atari environments Kangaroo, Seaquest, and Skiing. Table 1 reports the average episodic returns during the initial training phase, in which only the logic policy is active and the neural 12 Model Kangaroo Seaquest Skiing 

NeuralPPO 1045 ±577 453 ±93 −5492 ±2496 

BlendRL (no CA) 1280 ±372 953 ±14 ◦ − 5086 ±128 

BlendRL+Expert 3683 ±29 983 ±93 —BlendRL+GPT-4o 1112 ±40 783 ±63 −5171 ±124 

BlendRL+Claude 910 ±63 559 ±46 −5388 ±60 

GRAIL (GPT-4o) 3540 ±131 874 ±40 −5253 ±95 

GRAIL (Claude) ◦ 3625 ±36 ◦ 981 ±162 −5021 ±22 

Table 1: Average episodic return on the simplified environment. GRAIL consistently matches or outperforms all baselines, including BlendRL with expert-written valuations. Bold = best; ◦ = second best. Higher is better ( ↑)for Kangaroo and Seaquest; less negative is better ( ↑) for Skiing. Averages over 3 seeds (100 episodes); standard deviations in subscript. BlendRL+Expert results are from the original paper [25]; BlendRL+LLM variants use fixed proxy functions without learned grounding. “No CA” denotes learned valuation functions without concept alignment (cCA = 0 ). Concept-alignment coefficients: cCA = 0 .3 (Kangaroo), cCA = 0 .3/0.1 (Seaquest, GPT-4o/Claude), 

cCA = 0 .1 (Skiing). module is disabled. Both GRAIL and BlendRL with hand-crafted valuation functions achieve high scores, significantly outperforming the purely neural agent. This demonstrates that GRAIL can effectively ground spatial concepts and attain performance on par with policies designed using expert knowledge. In contrast, except for Skiing, BlendRL variants that directly employ LLM-generated proxy functions—from GPT-4o or Claude—perform substantially worse. This result underscores the limitation of using LLM outputs as direct replacements for expert-designed functions, and highlights the strength of GRAIL’s concept alignment strategy: rather than adopting LLM-generated functions verbatim, GRAIL treats them as supervision signals, enabling it to adapt its spatial semantics to the structure of each environment. We further compare approaches by the number of high-level goals achieved per episode. In Kangaroo, the goal is to reach the top of the screen; in Seaquest, to rescue all six divers while managing a depleting oxygen level. Figure 8 presents the average goals achieved per episode. Both GRAIL and BlendRL with hand-crafted valuation functions exhibit similarly high success rates and clearly outperform the purely neural agent, indicating that GRAIL reliably completes tasks without converging on suboptimal strategies. In these sparse-reward settings, purely neural agents tend to gravitate toward locally rewarding but ultimately ineffective behaviors—such as repeatedly firing at enemies for minor points rather than pursuing the main objectives. By leveraging LLMs to guide neuro-symbolic policies without being constrained by fixed proxy functions, GRAIL overcomes these limitations and achieves reliably goal-directed behavior even in the absence of hand-designed valuation functions. 

6.2 Interpretability of Learned Spatial Concepts 

To address Q2 , we examine the interpretability of the learned spatial concepts by comparing GRAIL’s valuation functions to both the hand-crafted functions from BlendRL and the LLM-generated proxy functions in the Kangaroo environment (Figure 9). Although both Claude and GPT-4o capture the general semantics of spatial concepts, they fail to ground them accurately within the game’s layout. For instance, GPT-4o assigns high truth values for left of ladder and 

right of ladder across nearly the full width of each floor but with overly narrow vertical extent, while Claude’s proxy covers nearly the entire height but sharply truncates activation based on horizontal distance from the ladder. These discrepancies reveal a fundamental limitation: without environment-specific adaptation, LLM-generated proxy functions lack the precision required to serve as direct valuations of spatial predicates. GRAIL addresses this gap by treating the proxy functions as flexible supervision rather than fixed definitions, allowing the agent to refine concept representations through environmental feedback and the reward signal. As a result, the learned spatial concepts are precisely tailored to Kangaroo’s layout—correcting the shortcomings of either proxy— and the resulting logic policy matches both the performance and interpretability of BlendRL’s hand-crafted functions while significantly surpassing either LLM alone. This confirms that GRAIL does not merely replicate proxy functions but learns spatial concepts that are well-aligned with the environment’s structure. We note that the heatmaps shown correspond to the best-performing seed; qualitatively similar spatial patterns emerge across all seeds despite minor variations in activation boundaries, as reflected in the standard deviations reported in Table 1. 13 NeuralPPO BlendRL 

> (GPT-4o)
> BlendRL
> (Claude)
> GRAIL
> (GPT-4o)
> GRAIL
> (Claude)
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Goals per Episode  Hard-coded

Kangaroo    

> 0.58
> 0.63 0.51
> 2.00 2.00
> NeuralPPO BlendRL
> (GPT-4o)
> BlendRL
> (Claude)
> GRAIL
> (GPT-4o)
> GRAIL
> (Claude)
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Goals per Episode  Hard-coded

Seaquest    

> 10.49
> 18.53
> 13.15
> 20.76 23.56
> Baselines GRAIL (ours) Hard-coded Baseline (BlendRL-expert)

Figure 8: GRAIL achieves high-level goals reliably by grounding spatial concepts. Average number of goals achieved per episode on the simplified environment (Stage 1, enemies removed, logic policy only). In Kangaroo, a goal corresponds to reaching the child at the top platform; in Seaquest, a goal corresponds to successfully rescuing all six divers and surfacing. The red dashed line indicates the hard-coded BlendRL-expert baseline. Both GRAIL variants (GPT-4o and Claude) match or exceed this baseline, achieving 2.00 goals per episode in Kangaroo and over 20 in Seaquest. In contrast, purely neural agents and agents using raw LLM proxy functions as direct valuations fall significantly short—particularly BlendRL (Claude) in Seaquest (13.15), highlighting the insufficiency of unrefined LLM-generated concepts. Averages are computed over 3 seeds (100 episodes each); error bars indicate standard deviation. We observe a similar pattern in Skiing (Figure 10), where the agent must learn the concepts left of flag and 

right of flag to navigate between flag gates. The LLM-generated proxy functions fail to capture the environment-specific semantics: GPT-4o produces a narrow vertical strip for left of flag , while Claude generates broad horizon-tal bands—neither accounts for the vertical structure of the task. In Skiing, the player moves downhill and must identify whether it is left or right of an upcoming flag before reaching it. This requires the learned concepts to incorporate a vertical margin: activation should extend above the flag’s position, reflecting the anticipatory nature of the steering decision. GRAIL with Claude successfully captures this skiing-specific semantics. The learned left of flag and 

right of flag heatmaps show activation concentrated above and to the relevant side of each flag, demonstrating that the agent has discovered that “left of a flag” in Skiing means being to the left and slightly ahead of it. This result highlights the adaptability of GRAIL: starting from generic LLM priors that only encode a na¨ ıve notion of horizontal direction, the framework autonomously learns environment-specific concept groundings that account for the vertical dynamics of the task. 

6.3 Concept Learning in Joint Neuro-Symbolic Policy Training 

To answer Q3 , we evaluate each method in the complete environment, where both BlendRL and GRAIL jointly opti-mize their neuro-symbolic policies. The spatial concepts established in the previous stages are kept fixed throughout this phase. Figure 11 reports the average episodic return and goal completion for all baselines. We distinguish two complementary success criteria: episodic return (cumulative reward, including short-term gains such as defeating enemies) and goal completion (achieving the environment’s high-level objective—reaching the child in Kangaroo or rescuing all divers in Seaquest). These metrics can diverge, as an agent may maximize return through short-term actions without ever completing the long-horizon goal. Our results reveal a consistent tension between these criteria. In Kangaroo, GRAIL (Claude) achieves the highest return (8155), yet BlendRL’s hand-coded strategy yields far more goals (3.48 vs. 0.79 per episode), suggesting that expert-designed concepts are better tuned to this environment’s specific goal structure. In Seaquest, the pattern re-verses: BlendRL achieves the highest return (4706) but zero goal completions, whereas GRAIL is the only method that successfully rescues divers (1.05 goals per episode for GPT-4o). This demonstrates that high return does not im-ply meaningful task completion, and that GRAIL’s learned concepts enable qualitatively different behavior—pursuing high-level goals that reward-maximizing baselines neglect entirely. 14 left_of_ladder     

> BlendRL+Expert BlendRL+GPT4o BlendRL+Claude4 GRAIL (GPT4o) GRAIL (Claude4)
> 0
> 1v
> right_of_ladder on_ladder
> Kangaroo

Figure 9: GRAIL produces interpretable spatial concepts that capture subtle environmental details (Kangaroo). 

Heatmaps indicate the truth values produced by the valuation functions as the player’s position varies within the scene. Each white dot denotes the location of a ladder, relative to which truth values for the spatial predicates are evaluated. The results are visualized (from left to right) for: hand-crafted valuation functions (BlendRL+Expert), proxy functions generated by GPT-4o and Claude, and the valuation functions learned by GRAIL under weak supervision from either proxy. Platform and ladder outlines are depicted as white boxes. This return-versus-goal tension highlights an open challenge in neuro-symbolic RL: jointly optimizing for reward and high-level goal completion. In the following section, we analyze barriers to effective concept grounding and discuss potential paths forward. Beyond aggregate performance, we examine whether the learned spatial concepts remain meaningful after joint train-ing. Figure 12 visualizes the spatial concepts acquired by the blending module in Seaquest. The hand-coded BlendRL functions fail to capture the underlying environmental semantics, producing largely uniform distributions. Raw proxy functions from Claude and GPT-4o yield inconsistent activation patterns that do not reliably reflect the spatial struc-ture of the environment. In contrast, GRAIL produces more coherent and adaptive representations: in both the Claude and GPT-4o settings, it broadens the activation map of close by enemy , extending it horizontally to account for enemies that enter from both sides and move laterally—an adjustment well-aligned with the task’s demands. These results demonstrate that GRAIL can adaptively ground spatial concepts even in complex environments with dynamic elements such as enemies. 15 left_of_flag    

> BlendRL+GPT4o BlendRL+Claude4 GRAIL (GPT4o) GRAIL (Claude4)
> 0
> 1v
> right_of_flag

Skiing Figure 10: Learned spatial concepts in Skiing. Heatmaps show truth values for left of flag and right of flag 

as the player’s position varies. Each white dot marks the position of a flag gate. Without concept alignment (BlendRL+GPT-4o, BlendRL+Claude), the proxy functions produce overly simplistic patterns—e.g., a narrow vertical strip or broad horizontal bands. In contrast, GRAIL learns asymmetric, environment-adapted concepts that concen-trate activation in the relevant diagonal regions ahead of the player, reflecting the downhill direction of movement in Skiing. NeuralPPO BlendRL 

> (hard-coded)
> GRAIL
> (GPT4o)
> GRAIL
> (Claude)

Model 

> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> 10000
> Average Return per Episode

Kangaroo  

> NeuralPPO BlendRL
> (hard-coded)
> GRAIL
> (GPT4o)
> GRAIL
> (Claude)

Model 

> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> Average Return per Episode

Seaquest   

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Goals Achieved per Episode
> 0.65
> 3.48
> 0.66 0.79
> 2589
> 5925
> 4993
> 8155
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> Goals Achieved per Episode
> 0.00 0.00
> 1.05
> 0.87
> 2216
> 4706
> 334
> 868

Average Return Goals Achieved 

Figure 11: Return vs. goal completion in the full environment (Stage 2). Blue bars show average episodic return; pink bars show goals achieved per episode (reaching the child in Kangaroo; rescuing all divers in Seaquest). In Kangaroo, GRAIL (Claude) achieves the highest return but BlendRL’s hand-coded strategy yields far more goals. In Seaquest, only GRAIL completes any goals, while baselines that maximize return fail to rescue divers entirely. Averages over 3 seeds (100 episodes); cCA = 0 .3.16 BlendRL+Expert BlendRL+Claude4 BlendRL+GPT4o GRAIL (Claude4) GRAIL (GPT4o) Figure 12: Stage 2: learned close by enemy concept in Seaquest. The blending module decides when to del-egate control to the symbolic policy based on learned spatial predicates. Each heatmap shows the activation of 

close by enemy as a function of relative object position; white dots mark enemy positions. GRAIL produces broader, horizontally extended activations that capture lateral enemy movement, whereas hand-coded BlendRL functions yield near-uniform distributions and raw LLM proxies show high variability. 

6.4 Ablation: Impact of Concept Alignment 

Figure 13 compares the concept alignment loss LCA and the number of goals achieved during Stage 1 training in Kangaroo for different values of the alignment coefficient cCA ∈ { 0.3, 1.0} and the annealing factor γCA ∈ { 0, 1}.Two observations stand out. First, performance consistently improves as the learned concepts diverge from the LLM proxy functions—rising LCA coincides with rising goals—indicating that the agent must move beyond the initial proxies to discover effective groundings. Second, annealing the alignment loss ( γCA = 1 ) accelerates convergence and reduces sensitivity to the choice of cCA . Together, these results suggest that strong initial guidance from the concept aligner, gradually attenuated over training, provides the best balance between alignment and adaptability. The remaining hyperparameters are set as follows. The grid resolution is K = 49 , providing sufficient granularity to capture fine-grained spatial relationships while remaining computationally tractable ( LCA scales as O(K2) per predicate per iteration). The valuation function is a compact MLP ( 2 → 64 → 32 → 1 with ReLU activations and a sigmoid output): the 2-dimensional input (relative offset) is low-dimensional, and a smaller network encourages smooth, interpretable groundings rather than overfitting to spurious patterns. 

Figure 13: Concept alignment loss LCA vs. goals during Stage 1 training (Kangaroo). Each panel shows a different combination of alignment coefficient cCA and annealing factor γCA . Performance improves as concepts diverge from the LLM proxies (rising LCA ), and annealing ( γCA = 1 ) accelerates convergence. 17 6.5 Concept Misalignment Challenge 

To address Q4 , we examine concept misalignment—cases where the agent learns spatial groundings that are systemat-ically incorrect despite achieving reasonable returns. Although GRAIL acquires useful concepts overall, our analysis reveals recurring failure patterns. We present a qualitative analysis of representative cases below. Figure 14 illustrates misaligned spatial concepts in Kangaroo. In the two leftmost examples, the agent incor-rectly associates left of ladder with a ladder on a different platform. A similar cross-platform confusion arises for right of ladder (center). The two rightmost examples reveal a complementary failure mode: the agent’s 

on ladder activation is biased toward the top platform even when evaluated relative to ladders on lower platforms, likely due to the disproportionately high reward for reaching the top. These observations underscore that fully aligned concept acquisition remains a significant open challenge in neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning. GRAIL mitigates this by introducing weak supervision at the predicate level, supplementing the action-level reward signal, but further work is needed to eliminate such systematic misalignments. 

Figure 14: Examples of misaligned spatial concepts in Kangaroo. Each heatmap shows the learned truth value of a spatial predicate relative to a single ladder (white dot). Left two: left of ladder incorrectly activates for an unrelated ladder on a different platform. Center: right of ladder exhibits similar cross-platform confusion. Right two: on ladder is biased toward the top platform, likely due to the disproportionately high reward for reaching it. These misalignments typically arise when the alignment coefficient cCA is set too low. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We introduced GRAIL, a neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning framework that acquires spatial concepts through direct interaction with the environment. GRAIL leverages LLMs to generate proxy functions as weak supervision for concept grounding, and aligns these representations to each environment via a learnable concept aligner. Across Kangaroo, Seaquest, and Skiing, GRAIL matched or exceeded strong neural and neuro-symbolic baselines, produc-ing interpretable spatial concepts on par with hand-crafted valuation functions—without requiring expert-designed concept priors. 

Scope and limitations. GRAIL automates the grounding of spatial predicate semantics —the valuation functions that map object-pair offsets to truth values—while the predicate inventory, logic programs (Figure 6), and object-centric state extraction (OCAtari; 61) remain externally specified. The two-stage training procedure, in which concepts are first learned in simplified environments (Stage 1) and then frozen during joint policy training (Stage 2), constitutes a form of curriculum learning analogous to Mao et al. [20]. This design prevents concept drift under short-term reward pressure but limits end-to-end adaptability. The concept aligner serves as a warm-start rather than a hard constraint—performance improves as learned concepts diverge from the proxies (Figure 13)—yet a fundamentally incorrect proxy could still mislead early learning. In our experiments, a single prompt template per environment and the first syntactically valid LLM output sufficed, suggesting reasonable robustness to LLM choice, though a systematic study of prompt sensitivity and corrupted proxies remains open. 

Future work. A natural next step is end-to-end training that eliminates the two-stage split, allowing concepts to co-adapt with the full policy. Extending GRAIL to n-ary and non-spatial predicates would broaden its applicability but requires richer input representations and proxy designs. On the alignment side, replacing the current binary cross-entropy objective (Eq. equation 10) with ranking or contrastive losses may improve robustness to proxy noise. A18 particularly important direction is compositional concept grounding, where coupled semantics across predicates— e.g., between (A, B, C ) requiring joint reasoning over left of and right of —are modeled through differentiable logical operators. Further transparency could be gained by replacing MLPs with more interpretable architectures such as differentiable logic gate networks [81] or program synthesis [70]. Finally, scaling GRAIL to realistic embodied domains such as autonomous driving [82], urban micromobility [83], and human-robot collaboration [84] would test its generality beyond Atari environments. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was partly funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Research, Science and the Arts (HMWK) within their joint support of the National Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity ATHENE, via the “SenPai:XReLeaS” project. The work has benefited from the Clusters of Excellence “Reasonable AI” (EXC-3057) and “The Adaptive Mind” (EXC-3066), both funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy. 

# References 

[1] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013. [2] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [3] Adri` a Puigdom` enech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2020. [4] A. Bhatt, D. Palenicek, B. Belousov, M. Argus, A. Amiranashvili, T. Brox, and J. Peters. Crossq: Batch nor-malization in deep reinforcement learning for greater sample efficiency and simplicity. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [5] Andrew Liu and Alla Borisyuk. A role of environmental complexity on representation learning in deep rein-forcement learning agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03436 , 2024. [6] Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Bl¨ uml, Fabian Tatai, Th´ eo Vincent, Bjarne Gregori, Elisabeth Dillies, Jan Peters, Con-stantin Rothkopf, and Kristian Kersting. Deep reinforcement learning agents are not even close to human intel-ligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21731 , 2025. [7] Quentin Delfosse, Sebastian Sztwiertnia, Wolfgang Stammer, Mark Rothermel, and Kristian Kersting. Inter-pretable concept bottlenecks to align reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the Conference on Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [8] Zhengyao Jiang and Shan Luo. Neural logic reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2019. [9] Daiki Kimura, Masaki Ono, Subhajit Chaudhury, Ryosuke Kohita, Akifumi Wachi, Don Joven Agravante, Michi-aki Tatsubori, Asim Munawar, and Alexander Gray. Neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning with first-order logic. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,2021. [10] Yushi Cao, Zhiming Li, Tianpei Yang, Hao Zhang, Yan Zheng, Yi Li, Jianye Hao, and Yang Liu. GALOIS: boosting deep reinforcement learning via generalizable logic synthesis. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [11] Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and explainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [12] Shao-Hua Sun, Te-Lin Wu, and Joseph J. Lim. Program guided agent. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020. [13] Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Programmati-cally interpretable reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2018. 19 [14] Daoming Lyu, Fangkai Yang, Bo Liu, and Steven Gustafson. SDRL: interpretable and data-efficient deep rein-forcement learning leveraging symbolic planning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence (AAAI) , 2019. [15] Quentin Cappart, Thierry Moisan, Louis-Martin Rousseau, Isabeau Pr´ emont-Schwarz, and Andre A Cire. Com-bining reinforcement learning and constraint programming for combinatorial optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2021. [16] Hector Kohler, Quentin Delfosse, Riad Akrour, Kristian Kersting, and Philippe Preux. Interpretable and editable programmatic tree policies for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14956 , 2024. [17] Jerome S. Bruner, Jacqueline J. Goodnow, and George A. Austin. A Study of Thinking . John Wiley and Sons, 1956. [18] Eleanor H Rosch. Natural categories. Cognitive psychology , 4(3):328–350, 1973. [19] E. James Archer. The psychological nature of concepts. In Analyses of Concept Learning , pages 37–49. Elsevier, 1966. [20] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12584 ,2019. [21] Joy Hsu, Jiayuan Mao, Josh Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. What’s left? concept grounding with logic-enhanced foundation models. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [22] Jiayuan Mao, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. Neuro-symbolic concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06191 ,2025. [23] Tom Silver, Rohan Chitnis, Nishanth Kumar, Willie McClinton, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Predicate invention for bilevel planning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2023. [24] George A. Vouros. Explainable deep reinforcement learning: State of the art and challenges. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(5):1–39, 2022. [25] Hikaru Shindo, Quentin Delfosse, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Blendrl: A framework for merging symbolic and neural policy learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [26] Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:1–64, 2018. [27] Hikaru Shindo, Viktor Pfanschilling, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. αILP: thinking visual scenes as differentiable logic programs. Machine Learning (MLJ) , 2023. [28] John W. Lloyd. Foundations of Logic Programming . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1984. [29] Raymond Reiter. Knowledge in Action: Logical Foundations for Specifying and Implementing Dynamical Sys-tems . MIT Press, 2001. [30] Hikaru Shindo, Masaaki Nishino, and Akihiro Yamamoto. Differentiable inductive logic programming for struc-tured examples. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2021. [31] Saso Dzeroski, Luc De Raedt, and Kurt Driessens. Relational reinforcement learning. Machine Learning (MLJ) ,2001. [32] Kristian Kersting, Martijn van Otterlo, and Luc DeRaedt. Bellman goes relational. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2004. [33] Kristian Kersting and Kurt Driessens. Non-parametric policy gradients: a unified treatment of propositional and relational domains. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2008. [34] Tobias Lang, Marc Toussaint, and Kristian Kersting. Exploration in relational domains for model-based rein-forcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) , 2012. [35] Rishi Hazra and Luc De Raedt. Deep explainable relational reinforcement learning: A neuro-symbolic approach. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Research Track - European Conference (ECML PKDD) , 2023. [36] Kamal Acharya, Waleed Raza, Carlos Dourado, Alvaro Velasquez, and Houbing Herbert Song. Neurosymbolic reinforcement learning and planning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 5(5):1939–1953, 2023. 20 [37] Fateme Golivand Darvishvand, Hikaru Shindo, Sahil Sidheekh, Kristian Kersting, and Sriraam Natarajan. Human-allied relational reinforcement learning. In 25th Annual Conference on Advances in Cognitive Systems (ACS) , 2025. [38] Hikaru Shindo, Viktor Pfanschilling, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Learning differentiable logic programs for abstract visual reasoning. Machine Learning (MLJ) , 2024. [39] Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2020. [40] Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Giannini, Michelan-gelo Diligenti, Zohreh Shams, Frederic Precioso, Stefano Melacci, Adrian Weller, Pietro Li´ o, and Mateja Jamnik. Concept embedding models: Beyond the accuracy-explainability trade-off. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [41] Wolfgang Stammer, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Right for the right concept: Revising neuro-symbolic concepts by interacting with their explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. [42] David Steinmann, Wolfgang Stammer, Antonia W¨ ust, and Kristian Kersting. Object-centric concept-bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. [43] Jingyuan Sha, Hikaru Shindo, Kristian Kersting, and Devendra Singh Dhami. Neuro-symbolic predicate in-vention: Learning relational concepts from visual scenes. Neurosymbolic Artificial Intelligence Journal (NAIJ) ,2025. [44] Jingyuan Sha, Hikaru Shindo, Kristian Kersting, and Devendra Singh Dhami. Gestalt vision: A dataset for evaluating gestalt principles in visual perception. In 19th International Conference on Neurosymbolic Learning and Reasoning (NeSy) , 2025. [45] Antonia W¨ ust, Wolfgang Stammer, Hikaru Shindo, Lukas Helff, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Synthesizing visual concepts as vision-language programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2026. [46] Hikaru Shindo, Manuel Brack, Gopika Sudhakaran, Devendra Singh Dhami, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Deisam: Segment anything with deictic prompting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [47] Lukas Helff, Wolfgang Stammer, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. V-lol: Adiagnostic dataset for visual logical learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07743 , 2023. [48] James F. Allen. Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals. Communications of the ACM , 26(11):832–843, 1983. [49] Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold, Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [50] Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. SPACE: unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial attention and decomposition. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020. [51] Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin Fathy Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric learning from video. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. [52] Quentin Delfosse, Wolfgang Stammer, Thomas Rothenbacher, Dwarak Vittal, and Kristian Kersting. Boosting object representation learning via motion and object continuity. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Research Track - European Conference (ECML PKDD) , 2023. [53] Dan Haramati, Tal Daniel, and Aviv Tamar. Entity-centric reinforcement learning for object manipulation from pixels. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [54] Chao Chen, Fei Wang, and Xinyao Wang. Slot-based object-centric reinforcement learning algorithm. In Inter-national Conference on CYBER Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems , 2024. [55] Nils Grandien, Quentin Delfosse, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable end-to-end neurosymbolic reinforcement learning agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14371 , 2024. [56] Malte Mosbach, Jan Niklas Ewertz, Angel Villar-Corrales, and Sven Behnke. Sold: Slot object-centric latent dy-namics models for relational manipulation learning from pixels. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2025. 21 [57] Elisabeth Dillies, Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Bl¨ uml, Raban Emunds, Florian Peter Busch, and Kristian Kersting. Better decisions through the right causal world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07257 , 2025. [58] Yosuke Nishimoto and Takashi Matsubara. Object-centric world models for causality-aware reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2026. [59] Jannis Bl¨ uml, Cedric Derstroff, Bjarne Gregori, Elisabeth Dillies, Quentin Delfosse, and Kristian Kersting. Deep reinforcement learning via object-centric attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03024 , 2025. [60] Fan Feng, Phillip Lippe, and Sara Magliacane. Learning interactive world model for object-centric reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2025. [61] Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Bl¨ uml, Bjarne Gregori, Sebastian Sztwiertnia, and Kristian Kersting. Ocatari: Object-centric atari 2600 reinforcement learning environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08649 , 2023. [62] Lirui Luo, Guoxi Zhang, Hongming Xu, Yaodong Yang, Cong Fang, and Qing Li. End-to-end neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning with textual explanations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [63] Weipu Zhang, Adam Jelley, Trevor McInroe, and Amos Storkey. Objects matter: Object-centric world models improve reinforcement learning in visually complex environments. In Reinforcement Learning and Video Games Workshop@ RLC , 2025. [64] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 2015. [65] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2016. [66] Xu Zhao, Wenchao Ding, Yongqi An, Yinglong Du, Tao Yu, Min Li, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. Fast segment anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12156 , 2023. [67] Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Self-supervised visual reinforcement learning with object-centric representations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. [68] Iou-Jen Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Raymond A Yeh, and Alexander G Schwing. Semantic tracklets: An object-centric representation for visual multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2021. [69] Jaesik Yoon, Yi-Fu Wu, Heechul Bae, and Sungjin Ahn. An investigation into pre-training object-centric rep-resentations for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2023. [70] Antonia W¨ ust, Wolfgang Stammer, Quentin Delfosse, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Pix2code: Learning to compose neural visual concepts as programs. In Proceedings of Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI) , 2024. [71] Wolfgang Stammer, Antonia W¨ ust, David Steinmann, and Kristian Kersting. Neural concept binder. In Proceed-ings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [72] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2018. [73] Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. In Proceed-ings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2021. [74] Emilio Parisotto, Francis Song, Jack Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant Jayakumar, Max Jader-berg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, et al. Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2020. [75] Wolfgang Stammer, Marius Memmel, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Interactive disentanglement: Learning concepts by interacting with their prototype representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 22 [76] Sriraam Natarajan, Saurabh Mathur, Sahil Sidheekh, Wolfgang Stammer, and Kristian Kersting. Human-in-the-loop or ai-in-the-loop? automate or collaborate? In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2025. [77] Anthropic. Claude 4 sonnet. https://claude.ai/ , 2025. [Large language model]. [78] OpenAI. Chatgpt-4o. https://openai.com/research/ , 2025. [Large language model]. [79] Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) , 2013. [80] Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Bl¨ uml, Bjarne Gregori, and Kristian Kersting. Hackatari: Atari learning environments for robust and continual reinforcement learning. In Working Notes of the RLC 2024 Workshop on Interpretable Policies in Reinforcement Learning , 2024. [81] Felix Petersen, Christian Borgelt, Hilde Kuehne, and Oliver Deussen. Deep differentiable logic gate networks. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [82] Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Qihang Zhang, Zhenghai Xue, and Bolei Zhou. Metadrive: Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2022. [83] Wayne Wu, Honglin He, Jack He, Yiran Wang, Chenda Duan, Zhizheng Liu, Quanyi Li, and Bolei Zhou. Metau-rban: An embodied ai simulation platform for urban micromobility. In Proceedings of the International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [84] Xavier Puig, Eric Undersander, Andrew Szot, Mikael Dallaire Cote, Tsung-Yen Yang, Ruslan Partsey, Ruta Desai, Alexander Clegg, Michal Hlavac, So Yeon Min, Vladim´ ır Vondruˇ s, Theophile Gervet, Vincent-Pierre Berges, John M Turner, Oleksandr Maksymets, Zsolt Kira, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Jitendra Malik, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Unnat Jain, Dhruv Batra, Akshara Rai, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Habitat 3.0: A co-habitat for humans, avatars, and robots. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 23