Title: Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04190v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:10:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 

XINYAN MA, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

XIANHAO OU and WEIHAO ZHANG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

SHIXIN JIANG and RUNXUAN LIU, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

DANDAN TU, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., China 

LEI CHEN, Bay Area International Business School, Beijing Normal University, China 

MING LIU ∗, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

BING QIN, Harbin Institute of Technology, China Knowledge Graphs (KGs) serve as a critical foundation for AI systems, yet their automated construction inevitably introduces noise, compromising data trustworthiness. Existing triple verification methods, based on graph embeddings or language models, often suffer from single-source bias by relying on either internal structural constraints or external semantic evidence, and usually follow a static inference paradigm. As a result, they struggle with complex or long-tail facts and provide limited interpretability. To address these limitations, we propose SHARP (Schema-Hybrid Agent for Reliable Prediction), a training-free autonomous agent that reformulates triple verification as a dynamic process of strategic planning, active investigation, and evidential reasoning. Specifically, SHARP combines a Memory-Augmented Mechanism with Schema-Aware Strategic Planning to improve reasoning stability, and employs an enhanced ReAct loop with a Hybrid Knowledge Toolset to dynamically integrate internal KG structure and external textual evidence for cross-verification. Experiments on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind show that SHARP significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines, achieving accuracy gains of 4.2% and 12.9%, respectively. Moreover, SHARP provides transparent, fact-based evidence chains for each judgment, demonstrating strong interpretability and robustness for complex verification tasks. CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Cross-validation ; Intelligent agents ; Ontology engineering ;

Knowledge representation and reasoning ; • Information systems → Information extraction .Additional Key Words and Phrases: knowledge graph, triple verification, autonomous agents, large language models, retrieval-augmented generation, reasoning 

ACM Reference Format: 

Xinyan Ma, Xianhao Ou, Weihao Zhang, Shixin Jiang, Runxuan Liu, Dandan Tu, Lei Chen, Ming Liu, and Bing Qin. 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 0, 0, Article 0 (April 2026), 30 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

> ∗

Corresponding author. Authors’ Contact Information: Xinyan Ma, xyma@ir.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China; Xianhao Ou, 25S103427@stu.hit.edu.cn; Weihao Zhang, 2022112925@stu.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China; Shixin Jiang, sxjiang@ir.hit.edu.cn; Runxuan Liu, rxliu@ir.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China; Dandan Tu, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China, tudandan@huawei.com; Lei Chen, Bay Area International Business School, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, chenlei@bnu.edu.cn; Ming Liu, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, mliu@ir.hit.edu.cn; Bing Qin, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, bqin@ir.hit.edu.cn. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 1558-2868/2026/4-ART0 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026.  

> arXiv:2604.04190v1 [cs.AI] 5 Apr 2026 0:2 Ma et al.

1 Introduction 

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are structured knowledge bases composed of triples in the form of 

(ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 ). In recent years, KGs have emerged as a foundational knowledge infrastructure for various fields, including question answering [ 14 ], recommender [ 11 ] systems, and search engines, demonstrating significant potential for efficient knowledge storage and com-plex retrieval [ 1 , 19 ]. Despite the massive scale of existing KGs (e.g., Freebase, Wikidata), their construction processes often rely on automated extraction techniques, which inevitably introduce noise and errors. Such erroneous triples not only undermine the credibility of the data [ 4] but also compromise the reliability of downstream applications through error propagation [ 20 ]. Therefore, achieving accurate and interpretable triple verification has become a critical and urgent challenge to address. As illustrated in Figure 1, the triple verification task has evolved through several stages since the inception of knowledge graphs. In the early stages of manual construction, verification pri-marily relied on human review; while this approach ensures high precision, it suffers from low efficiency and high labor costs, making it ill-suited for increasingly large-scale knowledge graphs. Subsequently, researchers introduced logic-rule/path-based methods. Although these methods effectively capture specific errors such as type conflicts, they are overly dependent on manually defined rules and exhibit limited generalization capabilities. With the advent of deep learning, graph embedding-based methods (e.g., TransE [ 5], RotatE [ 34 ]) became the mainstream. By mapping entities and relations into a low-dimensional vector space and utilizing the intrinsic structural features of triples to compute factual scores, these methods successfully capture global topological structures. However, they lack constraints from external semantics and struggle to handle complex multi-hop relations and long-tail entities. With the evolution of language models, triple verification has embraced new paradigms. The research community has begun to leverage the high-dimensional textual semantics internalized in pre-trained language models (PLMs) to assess factual validity (e.g., KG-BERT [ 57 ]). Such methods significantly enhance the models’ perception of commonsense through the linearization of triples. Nevertheless, PLMs rely solely on the knowledge solidified within their parameters, making it difficult to perceive real-time data that undergoes frequent updates. Recently, with the enhanced performance of large language models (LLMs), retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) approaches have further improved verification accuracy by integrating external textual evidence with model reasoning capabilities [30]. However, although these methods can identify erroneous triples within knowledge graphs to a certain extent, they still face three critical challenges when addressing complex verification scenarios: 1) Single information source: Rule-based and embedding-based methods rely solely on the internal structure of KGs, ignoring rich textual semantic evidence; conversely, language model-based approaches often overlook the strong logical constraints and structural information (e.g., schemas, paths) inherent in KGs [ 27 ]. There is a lack of a mechanism that can simultaneously integrate internal structures with external knowledge. 2) Static reasoning: Most traditional methods adopt single-step reasoning or static retrieval paradigms [ 33 ]. When confronted with difficult samples that require multi-hop logic or complex chains of evidence, models cannot perform multi-step investigations like humans, resulting in insufficient reasoning depth. 3) Insufficient interpretability: Existing methods fail to provide the underlying logic behind each judgment [ 21 ], making them ill-suited for scenarios requiring high reliability. To address the aforementioned challenges, inspired by recent advancements in LLM agents, we propose SHARP, a verification agent driven by schema-aware planning and hybrid knowledge 

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026.

Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:3 Microsof t founder 

> Satya Nadella Triple ：

Graph Embedding  Static LLM/RAG rule/path -based            

> Microsoft Satya Nadella
> Pred:True
> (False Positive)
> h + r ≈t
> founder(r)
> h
> t
> r
> Limitation ：
> Lack external knowledge
> Static reasoning
> Black box
> ...Satya Nadella
> is the CEO of
> Microsoft since
> 2014 ...
> Pred:True
> (H allucination)
> Retriever
> Limitation ：
> Ignores KG structure
> Static retrieval
> Single -step reasoning
> Limitation ：
> Manually defined
> Single info source
> Low generalization
> Microsoft
> Satya Nadella
> Key benefits ：
> Hybrid Knowledge
> Dynamic reasoning
> High interpretability
> Pred:True
> (False Positive)
> founder(X,Y) →isCompany(X)
> founder(X,Y) →isPerson(Y) Rules
> Pred:False
> Think Act
> Observe
> SHARP
> SHARP

Fig. 1. Comparisons between previous methods and our proposed SHARP. Traditional graph embedding and static LLM methods are limited by single-source information, static reasoning, or limited generalization, lead-ing to verification failures (False Positives). In contrast, SHARP successfully identifies errors by coordinating internal structure and external text within a dynamic reasoning loop. 

integration. We reformulate the triple verification task from a traditional classification problem into a cognitive process of “strategic planning, dynamic investigation, and evidential reasoning.” Specifically, SHARP simulates the cognitive workflow of human experts performing fact-checking. First, via a memory-augmented mechanism, the agent leverages analogical reasoning to derive guidance from pre-constructed similarity retrieval trajectories and generates a global plan based on the characteristics of the target triple. Subsequently, the agent enters a ’Think-Act-Observe’ loop, utilizing a hybrid toolset that encompasses both internal KG structures and external knowledge to dynamically gather evidence and refine its perspectives, ultimately producing both a verification result and an interpretable reasoning chain. This mechanism not only bridges information silos by achieving complementarity between internal structural constraints and external semantic evidence, but also realizes dynamic triple verification through real-time deliberation, retrieval, and feedback facilitated by planning and observation. Experiments conducted on the FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind datasets demonstrate that SHARP significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines, achieving substantial accuracy improvements of 4.2% and 12.9%, respectively. As a ’plug-and-play’ framework, it not only exhibits superior verification precision but also ensures interpretability by providing transparent, fact-based evidence chains for every judgment. Furthermore, we provide a comprehensive analysis of SHARP, covering tool utilization, efficiency, and computational costs. Finally, we conduct extensive ablation studies to validate the contribution and necessity of each individual component. The primary contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 

• New Paradigm: We propose SHARP, which introduces an autonomous agent framework based on tool invocation to the task of knowledge graph triple verification, realizing a paradigm shift from static prediction to dynamic reasoning. 

• Novel Architecture: We propose an enhanced ReAct architecture that integrates schema-aware planning with a memory-augmented mechanism, effectively resolving the instability of agent-based reasoning in KG tasks. 

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:4 Ma et al. 

• Novel Toolset: We design a hybrid knowledge toolset capable of dynamically fusing in-ternal structured logic with external unstructured semantic information from KGs. This effectively mitigates the bias inherent in single information sources and achieves efficient complementarity of heterogeneous knowledge. 

• SOTA Performance: Empirical results demonstrate that our method achieves SOTA per-formance across multiple datasets while maintaining superior interpretability, providing fact-based evidence tracking for every judgment. This validates the superiority and gen-eralizability of this paradigm in handling complex and long-tail knowledge verification tasks. 

2 Related Work 2.1 Triple Verification and Related Completion Methods 

Since triple verification is closely related to link prediction/completion, and many existing studies operationalize the verification of candidate triples as either link prediction or triple classification tasks, we adopt a unified perspective when reviewing this literature. Existing research on knowledge graph triple verification and completion can be broadly categorized into four main schools of thought: 

Logic-rule and path-based methods: Early random-walk methods such as PRA [ 15 ] leverage relational paths as interpretable features to infer missing facts. AMIE [ 9 ] further realized Horn rule mining under the open-world assumption. Subsequent verification studies extended this line by incorporating path-based and external textual evidence for triple validation. In particular, FactCheck [35] validates RDF triples with textual evidence, while ProVe [2] performs provenance verification by checking whether candidate triples are supported by their associated source docu-ments. Neural LP [ 56 ] later advanced this trajectory toward differentiable, end-to-end rule learning. 

Graph representation learning-based methods: Early translation-based models, such as TransE [ 5 ]and TransH [ 48 ], model relations as translations from head to tail entities. Subsequent mod-els—including DistMult [ 55 ], ComplEx [ 40 ], ConvE [ 7], TuckER [ 3 ], and RotatE [ 34 ]—have progres-sively enhanced the capability to capture critical relational patterns (e.g., symmetry, antisymmetry, inversion, and composition), whereas R-GCN [ 29 ] and CompGCN [ 41 ] incorporate relation-aware neighborhood aggregation into the scoring process. 

PLM-based methods: These methods focus on mining textual semantics of entities and relations within model parameters. KG-BERT [ 57 ] reconstructs triples as text sequences for sequence-level plausibility assessment; KEPLER [ 44 ] performs joint optimization of knowledge embeddings and language modeling; while SimKGC [ 43 ], LMKE [ 46 ], and PALT [ 31 ] further improve inductive generalization, long-tail modeling, and parameter efficiency. More recent PLM-based comple-tion methods further strengthen structural and prompt-based learning: StructKGC [ 18 ] improves knowledge graph completion via structure-aware contrastive learning, while ATAP [ 59 ] enhances commonsense knowledge graph completion through automatically generated continuous prompt templates. 

LLM-based methods: These methods employ LLMs for contextual reasoning rather than treating them merely as parametric memories. KG-llama and KoPA [ 60 ] adapt large language models to knowledge graph completion by reformulating triples into text and injecting structured knowledge into the prompting or adaptation process. KICGPT [ 51 ] injects structured demonstrations and retrieved triples into prompts. Contextualization Distillation and MPIKGC [ 54 ] leverage LLMs to enrich contextual evidence and relational understanding. Recent verification-oriented research, such as KGValidator [ 6], further emphasizes traceable verification based on retrieved provenance documents, moving beyond reliance solely on internal model knowledge.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:5

In summary, the research paradigm in related literature has evolved from explicit symbolic evidence to latent structural scoring, and further to text-based and retrieval-augmented reasoning. Nevertheless, for triple verification, the fusion of multi-source information, score calibration, and the traceability of evidence remain core open challenges. 

2.2 LLM-based Fact-Checking 

In this section, we adopt a generalized interpretation of LLM-based fact-checking, encompassing methods for factuality verification, error detection, and result correction targeting both textual claims and model-generated content. The tasks of knowledge graph triple verification and fact-checking share the same fundamental goal: assessing the veracity and reliability of a given statement. Early fact-checking benchmarks, such as FEVER [ 37 ] and SciFact [ 42 ], established a standard pipeline consisting of evidence re-trieval, evidence selection, and veracity judgment. With the advancement of LLMs and RAG, the implementation paradigms for LLM-based fact-checking have significantly expanded. On one hand, SelfCheckGPT [ 23 ] detects factual inconsistencies in generated content through sampling-based self-consistency comparisons, while FActScore [ 24 ] assesses the factuality of long-form text at the granularity of atomic facts. On the other hand, methods such as RARR [ 10 ], Verify-and-Edit [ 61 ], and CoVe [ 8 ] model factuality improvement as an iterative process driven by retrieval, verification, or self-correction, thereby enhancing the verifiability and reliability of generated outputs. Recently, research has begun to explore the integration of LLMs with knowledge graphs (KGs). For instance, KGV [ 53 ] combines LLMs with passage-level semantic graphs to evaluate the credibility of cyber threat intelligence, while R3 [ 38 ] explicitly anchors reasoning processes to KG triples to support verifiable commonsense reasoning and claim verification. Although these methods advance the processing of complex textual semantics, they primarily target unstructured claims or generated content rather than structured KG triples. Furthermore, most existing methods rely on static, single-turn paradigms, providing limited support for long-tail knowledge, evidence-scarce scenarios, or complex error patterns requiring multi-step interactive reasoning. Thus, while relevant, current LLM-based fact-checking approaches do not fully address the requirements of KG triple verification, particularly regarding structural constraint modeling, the synergy between internal and external knowledge, and multi-step agentic verification. 

2.3 Autonomous Agents 

Research on autonomous agents has advanced LLMs from static, prompt-driven, single-turn gener-ators into closed-loop decision systems capable of planning, acting, reflecting, and collaborating. ReAct [ 58 ] laid the foundation for interleaving reasoning and acting, enabling models to dynami-cally retrieve external information during the reasoning process. Toolformer [ 28 ] further explored the autonomous invocation of external tools and APIs by language models, while Reflexion [ 32 ]introduced language-based feedback and episodic memory mechanisms to facilitate iterative self-correction. Building upon this, frameworks such as AutoGen [ 52 ] and MetaGPT [ 12 ] have advanced agentic research into the multi-agent collaboration stage, supporting complex task resolution through role assignment, structured communication, and workflow orchestration. In the context of fact-checking, agentic methods transform traditional single-step prediction into multi-stage executable workflows comprising claim decomposition, evidence retrieval, cross-verification, and result aggregation. FactAgent [ 16 ] integrates claim decomposition, retrieval, and aggregation into a comprehensive fact-checking workflow that mirrors the manual verification pro-cess. Similarly, SAFE [ 50 ] demonstrates that search-based agents can conduct external verification on atomic facts within long-form text, thereby enhancing the reliability of factuality assessment. The agentic paradigm is also being extended to structured knowledge scenarios; for example, Debate  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:6 Ma et al.

on Graph [ 22 ] enhances the stability of graph reasoning through multi-role debate, KG-Agent [ 13 ]conducts multi-hop reasoning on the knowledge graph by constructing an agent framework, while MAKGED [ 17 ] leverages multi-agent collaboration to perform knowledge graph error detection. These studies illustrate that autonomous agents are evolving beyond general-purpose task execu-tion frameworks into a critical technical paradigm for fact-checking, knowledge verification, and structured reasoning. However, existing methods primarily target textual claim verification, general task solving, or specific sub-problems of graph reasoning, lacking a unified verification framework tailored for KG triple verification. Significant limitations persist, particularly regarding the synergistic utilization of internal and external knowledge, evidence attribution in multi-step verification, robust reasoning in long-tail knowledge scenarios, and the auditability of verification chains. 

3 Preliminary 

To systematically elucidate the working mechanism of SHARP, this section first provides the symbolic definitions for the knowledge graph and the triple verification task. Subsequently, we formalize the multi-source knowledge retrieval and verification process driven by the agent as an interactive sequential reasoning problem, and define its optimization objective. 

3.1 Task Definition 

A Knowledge Graph (KG) is typically defined as a directed multigraph G = (E , R, F ) , where E

represents the set of entities, R represents the set of relations, and F ⊆ E × R × E denotes the set of known factual triples. Each factual triple is denoted as (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡 ), indicating that a head entity 

ℎ ∈ E and a tail entity 𝑡 ∈ E are connected via a specific semantic relation 𝑟 ∈ R . Knowledge graph triple verification can thus be described as follows: given a target query triple 𝜏 𝑞 = (ℎ𝑞 , 𝑟 𝑞 , 𝑡 𝑞 ) to be verified, the objective of this task is to determine its truthfulness against objective facts. We define the ground-truth label as 𝑦 ∗ ∈ { 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒, 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 }. Unlike traditional methods that rely solely on the static graph structure G, our study extends the verification scope to the joint knowledge space of G ∪ W , where W denotes the external world knowledge. 

3.2 Sequential Reasoning Modeling for Verification 

To overcome the limitations of single-step reasoning in verifying complex triples (e.g., those involving long-tail entities or multi-hop logical relations), we formalize this verification task as an interactive sequential reasoning process. This process is driven by a Large Language Model (LLM)-based agent 𝐴𝑔 interacting with a heterogeneous knowledge environment ENV = ⟨G , W, M⟩ ,where M represents a pre-constructed memory bank of expert reasoning trajectories. The process is defined by the following core components: 

• Working Context C: C𝑡 represents the global context (working memory) maintained by the agent at time step 𝑡 . At the initial step 𝑡 = 0, the context comprises the system instruction 

𝐼 𝑠𝑦𝑠 , the input query 𝜏 𝑞 , and the prior schema guidance 𝑀 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 retrieved from the memory bank M. Therefore, 

C0 = 𝐼 𝑠𝑦𝑠 ⊕ 𝜏 𝑞 ⊕ 𝑀 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (1) where ⊕ denotes string/token concatenation. 

• Action Space A: The set of executable tool invocations. An action 𝑎 𝑡 = (𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 𝑘 , 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚 𝑘 ) ∈ A 

is defined as invoking a specific retrieval tool 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 𝑘 with query parameters 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚 𝑘 . The toolset covers internal structural queries (over G) and external semantic retrieval (over W).  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:7

• Observation Space O: An observation 𝑜 𝑡 ∈ O is the execution feedback from the environ-ment ENV in response to the action 𝑎 𝑡 , manifesting as a structured subgraph or a snippet of web text. 

• Agent Policy 𝜋 𝜃 : The autoregressive generation distribution parameterized by the LLM with weights 𝜃 . At each time step 𝑡 , based on the previous historical context C𝑡 −1, the agent first generates an internal reasoning thought 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 , and then samples the next optimal retrieval action: 

𝑎 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (· | C 𝑡 −1, 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 ) (2) 

• Context Update : The deterministic mechanism for appending history. After executing the action 𝑎 𝑡 and receiving the observation 𝑜 𝑡 from the environment, the working context is autoregressively updated: 

C𝑡 = C𝑡 −1 ⊕ 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 ⊕ 𝑎 𝑡 ⊕ 𝑜 𝑡 (1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) (3) 

3.3 Overall Verification Objective 

Under this formalized framework, knowledge graph triple verification is no longer a black-box binary classification problem, but rather a joint generation process of searching for the optimal evidence retrieval path and drawing a conclusion. Within the maximum time steps 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 , the interaction terminates when the agent triggers a termination action (i.e., 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 𝑘 = Finish ) or reaches the step limit. At this point, based on the final accumulated context C𝑇 , the agent outputs the final predicted label ˆ𝑦 and an extracted evidence chain E𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛 .The overall inference objective for the agent 𝐴𝑔 is to maximize the joint probability of generating the correct judgment 𝑦 ∗ alongside a self-consistent evidence chain: 

ˆ𝑦, E𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛 = arg max   

> 𝑦 ∈ { 𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑒,𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 },𝐸

𝑃 𝜋 𝜃 

 𝑦, 𝐸 | 𝜏 𝑞 , G, W, M (4) where 𝐸 denotes a candidate evidence sequence. The maximization of the probability 𝑃 𝜋 𝜃 is synergis-tically approximated through three phases: utilizing M for schema-aware initialization to optimize 

C0 (§4.2), dynamic routing based on the ReAct paradigm to find the optimal action sequence (§4.3), and acquiring high-quality intermediate observations via the heterogeneous toolset (§4.4). 

4 SHARP 

In this section, we first provide an overview of the overall architecture of SHARP. Subsequently, we will delve into the three core components of this framework respectively: trajectory-based initialization, iterative reasoning mechanism, and hybrid knowledge toolset. 

4.1 Framework Overview 

We formulate the knowledge graph triple verification task as an interactive sequential reasoning process based on hybrid knowledge retrieval. As illustrated in Figure 2, SHARP is built upon a LLM and adopts the “Think-Act-Observe” (ReAct) paradigm. To address the cold-start problem and the structural-semantic fragmentation issue encountered by existing methods when processing complex logic, the reasoning pipeline of SHARP is decomposed into three components: 

• Schema-Aware Initialization : By leveraging the structural and semantic features of the query triple 𝜏 𝑞 , the agent utilizes a memory-augmented mechanism to retrieve analogous reasoning trajectories from the expert memory bank M. These trajectories, combined with the relation schema, are used to generate an initial strategic plan 𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , which provides macro-level heuristic guidance for the subsequent investigation to avoid blind searching. 

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026.

0:8 Ma et al. thought: ...   

> action: ...
> observation: ...
> ...
> cooperation
> Newton Halley
> Component 1 ：Schema -Aware Initialization
> Memory -Augmented Bank

ϕ(•)

> Memory Trajectory

...... Semantic            

> Encoder
> Schema -Aware Planner(LLM)
> Initial Plan
> 1.check ‘cooperation’
> definition.
> 2.verify Newton's role via
> external source.
> 3.compare & conclude
> Component 2 ：Iterative Reasoning Loop
> Observe
> Think Act
> Thought
> I need to first confirm the
> identity and type of
> "Newton" ...
> Action
> KG_Basic_Info (‘Newton’)
> Observation
> Label:Newton
> Type:Human
> Description:English
> physicist and ...
> History
> Component 3 ：Hybrid Knowledge Toolset
> KG_Basic_Info_Tool KG_Path_Tool
> KG_Neighbor_Tool
> A. Internal Structure Tools (KG)
> Final Output (Verdict & evidence)
> verdict ：correct
> Evidence Chain ：Thought : ... Action: ...
> Observation: ... ... ... Final: correct because ...
> Wiki_evidence_Tool Web_evidence_Tool
> Newton
> B. External Semantic Tools(Open -world Text)
> Cmem

Fig. 2. The overall architecture overview of SHARP. The framework comprises three core components: (Component 1) Schema-Aware Initialization: By utilizing a semantic encoder to retrieve analogous reasoning trajectories from a pre-constructed memory bank, it generates an Initial Plan to address the cold-start problem; (Component 2) Iterative Reasoning Loop: Guided by the initial plan, the agent enters an improved ReAct loop, dynamically adjusting its reasoning strategy based on real-time observations; (Component 3) Hybrid Knowledge Toolset: It provides a suite of complementary tools to respectively probe internal KG structures (e.g., neighbors, paths) and external semantics (e.g., Wiki, Web searches), thereby achieving cross-validation of heterogeneous knowledge. 

• Iterative Reasoning Loop : Under the guidance of 𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , the agent enters a micro-level execution loop. At each time step 𝑡 , the agent performs a meta-cognitive evaluation (the Think phase) to assess the sufficiency of the currently accumulated evidence, subsequently selects the optimal action 𝑎 𝑡 (the Act phase), and updates the global context based on the newly acquired observation 𝑜 𝑡 (the Observe phase). This loop ensures that the reasoning process consistently remains goal-oriented. 

• Hybrid Knowledge Toolset : This component provides concrete execution support for the agent’s decision-making. We decouple knowledge acquisition into internal structural probing (topology mining based on the knowledge graph) and external semantic verification (evidence retrieval based on the Web). Based on this, we design a cross-validation toolset comprising five atomic capabilities. 

4.2 Schema-Aware Initialization 

4.2.1 Memory-Augmented Mechanism. To endow the agent with the ability to reason by analogy to expert logic and to ensure coherent guidance throughout the investigation process, we discard the conventional static few-shot strategy and adopt a global memory-augmented mechanism. We pre-construct an expert memory bank, denoted as M = {( 𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑡𝑟𝑎 𝑗 𝑖 )} 𝑁 𝑖 =1, containing high-quality reasoning trajectories. This memory bank is meticulously curated through a rigorous “human-in-the-loop” pipeline. Specifically, the initial trajectories are autonomously explored by the agent, followed by strict manual filtering and refinement. As illustrated in Figure 3, to guarantee the robustness and generalization capability of the framework, we categorize the most common triples in Wikidata into six core classes, i.e., Classification Core, Human Core, Geography Core, Time Core, 

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:9 Classification Core 

> Human Core
> Geography Core
> Time Core
> Culture Core
> Organizational Core
> Subclass
> Member
> Species
> Spouse
> Occupation
> Friend
> Nationality
> Capital
> Birth date
> Event time
> Death date
> Author
> Award
> Founder
> Field
> Subsidiary

Fig. 3. Six Core Categories of Common Triples and Their Examples. 

Culture Core, and Organizational Core. The memory bank M encompasses 50 high-frequency triple relations belonging to these six classes, yielding a total of 200 high-quality reasoning trajectories. Each trajectory 𝑡𝑟𝑎 𝑗 𝑖 meticulously records the complete reasoning and decision-making process (i.e., the “Think-Act-Observe” sequence) executed for a specific verification task 𝑥 𝑖 = (ℎ𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 ).In addition, we provide an analysis of sample trajectories from the Memory-Augmented Bank in Appendix B. For a given input query triple 𝜏 𝑞 = (ℎ𝑞 , 𝑟 𝑞 , 𝑡 𝑞 ), we deploy a pre-trained dense semantic encoder 

𝜙 (·) (e.g., Sentence-BERT) to map both the query and the memory instances into a shared latent semantic space. Based on cosine similarity, the model retrieves the top-𝑘 most similar trajectories to form the contextual memory set 𝐶 𝑚𝑒𝑚 :sim (𝜏 𝑞 , 𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝜙 (𝜏 𝑞 ) · 𝜙 (𝑥 𝑖 )∥𝜙 (𝜏 𝑞 )∥∥ 𝜙 (𝑥 𝑖 )∥ (5) 

𝐶 𝑚𝑒𝑚 =

> 𝑘

Ø

> 𝑗 =1

n

𝑡𝑟𝑎 𝑗 𝑗 | 𝑥 𝑗 ∈ arg max (𝑘 )  

> 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ M

sim (𝜏 𝑞 , 𝑥 𝑖 )

o

(6) It is worth emphasizing that 𝐶 𝑚𝑒𝑚 is not merely utilized as a transient cold-start prompt, but is embedded within the agent’s working memory as a persistent reference. During the reasoning process, the agent continuously consults these examples to dynamically calibrate its investigation direction and optimize its tool selection strategy, thereby avoiding logic deviations in long-horizon reasoning. 

4.2.2 Graph Schema-Aware Strategic Planning. To avoid aimless exploration within complex graph structures, the model first executes a meta-cognitive thinking step. Guided by a customized prompt (as shown in Figure 4), the agent synthesizes its understanding of the toolset capabilities T , the underlying graph schema features S of the query triple, and the retrieved memory 𝐶 𝑚𝑒𝑚 . The large language model policy 𝜋 𝜃 then generates an initial verification plan 𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 :

𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 = 𝜋 𝜃 

 Prompt 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 (𝜏 𝑞 , S, 𝐶 𝑚𝑒𝑚 , T )  (7) This plan details the logical steps for verification (e.g., “Step 1: Check entity definitions to verify type constraints; Step 2: Retrieve 1-hop neighbors to verify direct connectivity; Step 3: Search external  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:10 Ma et al.

Prompt 1: Schema-Aware Planning 

System Instruction: 

You are a specialized Knowledge Graph Verification Strategist. Your goal is to provide a Verification Plan for a given triple (Head, Relation, Tail) by analyzing the pattern characteristics of the triple to be tested. 

[Tool Definitions] 

(Note: The full tool definitions can be found in Section 4.4. They are omitted here for the sake of brevity.) 

Refer to the verification case: 

This is a complete verification process for a task similar to the task to be verified, which can be used as a reference when formulating the initial verification plan. Memory Trajectory 

Output Format 

Please strictly follow this format: === Strategic Plan === [Step 1 description using ToolName and Toolparam] [Step 2 description using ToolName and Toolparam] ... 

User Input: 

Target Triple: {triple} 

Fig. 4. The prompt template for the Schema-Aware Planning phase. 

news to confirm event timestamps” ). Ultimately, we inject 𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 as the initial observation ( 𝑂𝑏𝑠 0) into the agent’s initial global context 𝐶 0. This not only provides macro-level guidance but also acts as a heuristic anchor, effectively alleviating the goal-drifting problem commonly encountered in long-chain reasoning. 

4.3 Reasoning with ReAct Paradigm 

To overcome the issues of traditional React paradigms, which are prone to getting trapped in local search and hallucination when dealing with complex KG verification tasks, We enhance the standard ReAct paradigm by introducing a Plan Adherence and Correction Mechanism. The reasoning process is modeled as a sequence of discrete time steps 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 .At step 𝑡 , the agent operates on the current global context H𝑡 , which comprises four distinct components: the system instruction 𝐼 , the retrieved expert demonstrations C𝑚𝑒𝑚 , the initial strategic plan P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , and the accumulated interaction history. Formally, H𝑡 = (𝐼, C𝑚𝑒𝑚 , P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , ℎ 0: 𝑡 −1).As outlined in Algorithm 1, the agent executes the following recursive sub-processes: 

Think: The agent derives the subsequent strategy 𝑇ℎ 𝑡 based on the combination of the initial plan 

P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 and the accumulated observations 𝑂𝑏𝑠 .If the observation results violate P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , the agent will generate a deviation correction instruction in 𝑇ℎ 𝑡 . This process ensures that the agent adheres to the original goal while being able to dynamically refine or revise the plan in light of the constantly changing empirical evidence. 

Act: Based on the thought trace 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 , the agent selects the optimal tool 𝑎 from the toolset T and generates the corresponding execution arguments 𝑝 . This policy is formally represented as: 

𝑎𝑐 𝑡 = (𝑎, 𝑝 ) ∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎𝑐 𝑡 | H 𝑡 , 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 ) (8)  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:11

where 𝜋 𝜃 denotes the action policy distribution parameterized by the LLM. 

Observe: The environment (i.e., the Knowledge Graph interface or external search engine) receives and executes the action 𝑎𝑐 𝑡 , yielding the observation result 𝑜𝑏𝑠 𝑡 = 𝐸𝑛𝑣 (𝑎𝑐 𝑡 ). This new observation is appended to the interaction history, updating the global context to H𝑡 +1.If the tool feedback is empty or there is a conflict, it will trigger the Agent to re - evaluate the evidence chain in the next round of thinking. This loop persists until the agent issues a termination action Finish[Answer] or reaches the maximum step count 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 . To prevent infinite loops, we implement a Mandatory Judgment Mech-anism at 𝑡 = 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 , compelling the agent to perform probabilistic reasoning based on currently available information and output a final verdict. This mechanism ensures that even in cases where knowledge is extremely sparse, the system can output verification conclusions based on maximum - likelihood evidence instead of returning errors or timing out. In summary, this component ensures effective coordination between structured macro - planning (guided by P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 ) and dynamic micro - execution (driven by ReAct). The concise prompt templates for the cyclic reasoning phase and the forced judgment phase are shown in the figure 5 and 6. 

4.4 Hybrid Knowledge Toolset 

To bridge the semantic gap between the internal structural constraints of KGs and external open-world unstructured text, we design a comprehensive hybrid knowledge toolset. This toolset com-prises five atomic operations, empowering the reasoning agent to dynamically collect, filter, and cross-verify multimodal evidence. These tools are explicitly defined as API functions that the Large Language Model (LLM) agent can directly invoke via executable JSON formats. Detailed parameter settings, inputs, and outputs of these APIs are provided in Table 1. 

Algorithm 1 SHARP Reasoning with Plan Adherence 

Require: Target Triple 𝜏 ; System Instruction 𝐼 ; Knowledge Graph G; Toolset T ; Memory M

Ensure: Final Verdict 𝑦 , Evidence Chain E 

> 1:

C𝑚𝑒𝑚 ← RetrieveExpertDemos (𝜏, M)  

> 2:

P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 ← GenerateInitialPlan (𝜏, C𝑚𝑒𝑚 ) 

> 3:

ℎ0 ← ∅ ; H1 ← ( 𝐼, C𝑚𝑒𝑚 , P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , ℎ 0) ⊲ Init global context  

> 4:

𝑡 ← 1 

> 5:

while 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 do 

/* Phase 1: Think */  

> 6:

𝑡ℎ 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (Think | H 𝑡 ) ⊲ Derive strategy & correction 

/* Phase 2: Act */  

> 7:

𝑎𝑐 𝑡 = (𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑝 𝑡 ) ∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (Act | H 𝑡 , 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 ) ⊲ 𝑎 𝑡 ∈ T  

> 8:

if 𝑎 𝑡 is Finish[Answer] then  

> 9:

return ParseVerdictAndEvidence (𝑝 𝑡 ) 

> 10:

end if 

/* Phase 3: Observe */  

> 11:

𝑜𝑏𝑠 𝑡 ← Env (𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑝 𝑡 , G, Web ) ⊲ Get empirical evidence  

> 12:

ℎ𝑡 ← ℎ𝑡 −1 ∪ {( 𝑡ℎ 𝑡 , 𝑎𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑜𝑏𝑠 𝑡 )}  

> 13:

H𝑡 +1 ← ( 𝐼, C𝑚𝑒𝑚 , P𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 , ℎ 𝑡 ) 

> 14:

𝑡 ← 𝑡 + 1 

> 15:

end while 

/* Mandatory Judgment Mechanism */  

> 16:

return arg max 𝑦, E 𝑃 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑦, E | H 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) ⊲ Max-likelihood reasoning  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:12 Ma et al.

Prompt 2: Reasoning Instruction 

Role Definition 

You are an expert Knowledge Graph Verification Agent. Your goal is to verify the factual correctness of a given triple... 

Tool Definitions 

(Note: The full tool definitions can be found in Section 4.4. They are omitted here for the sake of brevity.) 

Interaction Protocol (ReAct) 

You must strictly follow this loop: 

• Thought: Analyze the current observation and the Initial Plan. What evidence is missing? 

• Action: Select a tool. Format: ToolName(value, ...) 

• STOP: Do NOT generate the Observation! Stop immediately after the Action. Wait for system feedback. 

• Observation: (The system will provide the tool output here) ... (Repeat the loop) ... 

Task Completion: 

When sufficient evidence is gathered, output the final verdict: Final Answer: [Correct/Incorrect] Because [Detailed explanation based on evidence] 

Judgment criteria: ... 

User Context: 

Strategic Plan: {plan} Related Reasoning Demonstrations: {trajectory case} Target Triple: {triple} Execution History: ... 

Fig. 5. The prompt template for the Reasoning phase 

4.4.1 KG Internal Structure Tools. These tools leverage the inherent logical constraints and topo-logical connections of the KG, serving as the primary source of structured evidence. 

• KG Definition Tool: Serving as the foundational step of the verification logic chain, this tool takes an entity 𝑒 or relation 𝑟 as input to query the underlying metadata. For entities, it returns the label, description , and aliases ; for relations, it returns the semantics, domain , and range . By querying the prior schema, the agent establishes clear definitions for entities and relations, which is essential for constructing a robust verification chain. 

• KG Neighbor Tool: Given an input entity 𝑒 and a target relation 𝑟 , blindly traversing the neighbor subgraph often introduces significant noise. Therefore, this tool retrieves 1-hop neighbor triples that are semantically filtered. We employ a dense retrieval approach, encoding the target relation 

𝑟 and candidate neighbor relations 𝑟 𝑖 into dense vectors using a pre-trained language model. The top-𝑘 most relevant triples are selected based on cosine similarity, helping the agent comprehend the entity’s contextual background along a specific semantic direction: 

N𝑘 (𝑒, 𝑟 ) = top-𝑘   

> (𝑒,𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑒 𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 ) ∈ G

 v𝑟 · v𝑟 𝑖 

∥v𝑟 ∥∥ v𝑟 𝑖 ∥



(9) 

• KG Path Tool: This tool takes a head entity ℎ and a tail entity 𝑡 as inputs and employs Bi-directional Breadth-First Search (Bi-BFS) to retrieve relational paths connecting them. To mitigate the combinatorial explosion typical in dense graphs, we restrict the maximum search depth to  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:13

Prompt 3: Mandatory Judgment 

SYSTEM ALERT: 

The verification process has reached the maximum step limit. You MUST now make a final decision. 

Reference Information 

Your Initial Impression (Internal Knowledge): {impression} Original Plan: {plan} Execution History (Evidence Collected): {history} 

Decision Logic 

• If the History contains clear evidence to prove or refute the triple (e.g., explicit KG paths or Web search results), prioritize the History. 

• If the History is useless (e.g., tools failed, no data found), please make the most likely judgment of the triple based on your Initial Impression and History. 

• Note: Even if History has no evidence to prove the triple, it does not necessarily mean that the triple is wrong. Please make the most likely judgment based on known information. 

Result MUST be strictly: 

Final Answer: [Correct/Incorrect] Because [Detailed explanation based on evidence or fallback knowledge] Target Triple: {triple} 

Fig. 6. The prompt template for the mandatory judgment phase Table 1. Overview of the Hybrid Knowledge Toolset API definitions. 

Tool API Name Parameters Output Evidence & Core Usage 1. Internal Structural Tools (KG) 

KG_Definition entity or relation : str Returns schema metadata (labels, domains, ranges) to establish basic definitions for nodes/edges. 

KG_Neighbor entity , relation : str Returns top-20 semantically correlated target enti-ties to analyze local subgraphs and co-occurrences. 

KG_Path entity_a , entity_b : str Returns explicit 1 to 3-hop relational paths to verify structural connectivity and implicit links. 

2. External Semantic Tools 

Wiki_Evidence (1) entity : str (2) entity_a , entity_b : str (1) Returns Wikipedia summaries/attributes to pro-vide encyclopedic background for a single entity. (2) Returns sentences mentioning both entities to discover explicit textual links. 

Web_Evidence question : str Returns top-5 Google search snippets as a final fall-back validation for long-tail or emerging facts. 

𝑛 ≤ 3 and incorporate a semantic pruning strategy based on degree centrality. Multi-hop paths provide crucial structured evidence for implicit reasoning (e.g., inferring a “grandfather” relation via continuous “father” links). Formally: Paths (ℎ, 𝑡 ) = (ℎ, 𝑟 1, 𝑥 1), . . . , (𝑥 𝑛 −1, 𝑟 𝑛 , 𝑡 ) | ∃ 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 −1 ∈ E , 𝑛 ≤ 3 (10)  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:14 Ma et al.

4.4.2 External Semantic Tools. These tools aim to complement the sparsity of KGs using open-world unstructured text. 

• Wiki Evidence Tool: This tool directly interfaces with the Wikipedia database and supports a dual-mode strategy. (1) Entity Mode : Given a single entity, it retrieves its summary and key attributes, providing encyclopedic background knowledge. (2) Co-occurrence Mode : Given an entity pair (ℎ, 𝑡 ), it performs sentence-level retrieval to extract contexts where both entities co-occur within a predefined word distance threshold 𝜏 . Such explicit textual evidence is highly effective for mining hidden relationships between entities. 

• Web Evidence Tool: Serving as the final fallback mechanism, this tool calls commercial search engine APIs (e.g., Google/Bing). It takes a natural language query generated by the agent and returns the top-𝑘 web snippets. This is crucial for verifying long-tail knowledge, emerging entities, and time-sensitive factual changes. 

4.4.3 Hybrid Multi-stage Retrieval and Re-ranking Mechanism. Evidently, the retrieval strategy plays a pivotal role in the aforementioned tool design. To ensure robustness, especially when handling noisy external text and massive graph nodes, we implement a hybrid multi-stage retrieval mechanism across all tools involving text and attribute recall. Traditional keyword matching (e.g., BM25) struggles with synonymy, while pure dense vector retrieval occasionally suffers from precision bias. For a given query 𝑞 and any candidate evidence 𝑑 , we design the following hybrid scoring function: Score (𝑞, 𝑑 ) = 𝛼 · Norm (BM25 (𝑞, 𝑑 )) + ( 1 − 𝛼 ) · cos (E(𝑞 ), E(𝑑 )) (11) where 𝛼 ∈ [ 0, 1] is a balancing hyperparameter, and E(·) denotes the sentence embedding vector. By cascading keyword-based exact matching with semantic re-ranking, this hybrid strategy effectively overcomes the limitations of standalone retrieval methods. It not only ensures the efficient comple-mentation of heterogeneous knowledge but also realizes a powerful cross-verification paradigm: structure guides semantics, and semantics interprets structure. 

> Table 2. Details for each dataset

Dataset Entity Relation Triple Source 

Wikidata5M-Ind 4,594,458 822 20,510,107 Wikidata FB15K-237 14,541 237 310,116 Freebase 

5 Experiments and Results 5.1 Datasets and Negative Sampling 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of SHARP in triple verification across the breadth of general knowledge and the depth of complex logic, we select two highly challenging real-world knowledge graph datasets: FB15K-237 [ 39 ] and Wikidata5M-Inductive [ 45 ]. These two datasets correspond to transductive complex reasoning and inductive open-world generalization scenarios, respectively. Detailed statistics are summarized in Table 2. 

• FB15K-237 (Reasoning Scenario): A classic transductive benchmark where inverse relations are removed to prevent structural leakage. Rich in complex topological paths, it compels models to perform explicit multi-hop reasoning rather than superficial pattern matching, serving as our primary testbed for evaluating deep logical inference capabilities.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:15

• Wikidata5M-Inductive (General Scenario): A massive-scale inductive benchmark featur-ing strictly disjoint entity sets across splits. Characterized by extreme relational sparsity and prominent long-tail distributions, it severely challenges traditional closed-world assumptions. We pioneer its application in the verification task to rigorously assess models’ zero-shot general-ization to unseen entities in open-world environments. 

Type-Constrained Negative Sampling. Since the original datasets consist exclusively of positive examples (Ground Truth), we employ a negative sampling strategy to construct erroneous triples. To avoid generating blatantly obvious simple negatives (e.g., “Obama - born_in - Banana”) and to construct a high-difficulty testing scenario, we adopt a type-constrained negative sampling strategy. Specifically, given a positive example 𝜏 = (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡 ), we replace either the head entity or the tail entity to generate a negative sample set N − 

> 𝜏

. The substitute entity 𝑒 ′ is strictly required to satisfy the identical fine-grained type constraint as the original entity: 

N − 

> 𝜏

= (𝑒 ′, 𝑟, 𝑡 ) | 𝑒 ′ ∈ E ℎ \ { ℎ} ∪ (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑒 ′) | 𝑒 ′ ∈ E 𝑡 \ { 𝑡 } (12) where E𝑥 = {𝑒 ∈ E | Type (𝑒 ) = Type (𝑥 )} denotes the candidate entity pool that shares the same semantic type Type (·) as entity 𝑥 . Such rigorous constraints (e.g., falsely replacing a “place_of_birth” with another valid city of the identical type) generate highly deceptive hard negatives, thereby compelling the model to abandon superficial entity type matching in favor of deep semantic discrimination. 

Evaluation Protocol. To strike a balance between evaluation efficiency and statistical significance, we randomly extract 1, 000 triples from the test set of each dataset, and utilize the aforementioned type-constrained strategy to generate corresponding hard negatives for 500 of them, thereby constructing a strictly balanced test set comprising 1, 000 samples. 

5.2 Baselines 

To systematically evaluate the effectiveness and superiority of SHARP, we comprehensively compare it against representative baseline models covering three mainstream paradigms in knowledge graph reasoning and verification: 

• Structure-based KGE: Including TransE [ 5], DistMult [ 55 ], and RotatE [ 34 ]. These methods serve as traditional baselines relying purely on the topological structural features of the knowledge graph. 

• PLM-based Methods: Including KG-BERT [ 57 ] and SimKGC [ 43 ]. These approaches leverage pre-trained language models to encode and classify the textual descriptions of triples, with a primary focus on semantic matching. 

• LLM-based Approaches: This paradigm is further divided into two sub-categories: (1) Zero-shot Inference : Directly utilizing GPT-3.5-Turbo [ 26 ], GPT-4o [ 25 ], and Qwen3-max [ 36 ] for verification, which serves to evaluate the foundational performance of large language models relying solely on their internal parametric knowledge. (2) Inference-Augmented Frameworks :Incorporating Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [ 49 ], Self-Consistency (SC) [ 47 ], and KGValidator [ 6], a state-of-the-art framework specifically designed for knowledge graph verification. To ensure fair comparison, all baselines are reproduced using official or standard implementations. Specifically, KGE models are implemented via OpenKE, PLM methods utilize their official open-source codebases, and LLM approaches are queried via their respective official APIs with default parameters. All hyperparameters strictly follow the optimal settings reported in their original papers.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:16 Ma et al.

5.3 Evaluation metrics 

To comprehensively quantify the triple verification performance, we adopt Accuracy (Acc) and F1-score (F1) as the primary evaluation metrics, supplemented by Precision and Recall to robustly reflect the overall prediction capability on the balanced test sets. Given the significant disparity in the output paradigms across various baselines, we implement a rigorous alignment evaluation protocol to ensure a fair comparison: (1) For KGE baselines outputting continuous scores (e.g., TransE), we search for the optimal threshold 𝛿 on the validation set to binarize these scores into final Boolean predictions. (2) For generative approaches based on LLMs and Agents, we directly parse their explicitly generated textual responses. Notably, to maintain strict evaluation standards, any refusal to answer or formatting violation is strictly penalized as an incorrect prediction. Further details regarding the evaluation metrics are provided in Appendix A. 

5.4 Experiments Settings 

5.4.1 Core Agent Configuration. We employ the full version of Qwen3-max as the backbone controller for SHARP, selected for its superior performance in instruction following and complex reasoning capabilities. The model is accessed via the official OpenAI Python SDK. To ensure reproducibility and eliminate randomness in generation, we set the decoding temperature to 0.The stop sequence is defined as “[Observation]” to strictly adhere to the ReAct interaction format. Furthermore, the maximum number of interaction turns is limited to 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 10 .

5.4.2 Vector Retrieval and Indexing. For all vector-based retrieval tasks—including trajectory re-trieval from the Memory Bank and semantic re-ranking of web snippets—we utilize the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model for efficient text encoding. We employ the FAISS library to construct dense vector indexes, enabling high-speed similarity search. 

5.4.3 Knowledge Environment and Tool Implementation. 

Knowledge Retrieval Environment. Given that the raw data for both FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M are aligned with the Wikidata knowledge base, we utilize the Wikidata API as the unified interface. Natural language queries are converted into SPARQL statements to retrieve precise structural information. 

Entity/Relation Disambiguation. To map natural language terms to Wikidata IDs (PID/QID), we adopt a two-stage strategy: (1) Keyword Matching: We first attempt to retrieve IDs via exact keyword search; (2) Semantic Matching: If keyword retrieval fails, we fallback to vector-based matching using the aforementioned encoder to identify the ID with the closest semantic meaning. 

Anti-Leakage Mechanism. Crucially, during the execution of the KG Neighbor Tool and KG Path Tool, we explicitly filter out the test triple 𝜏 = (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡 ) itself from the retrieval results. This strict decontamination step prevents the agent from seeing the ground truth directly (Data Leakage), forcing it to reason based on context rather than rote memorization. 

Tool Return Limits. To balance information density and context window usage, the KG tools (Neighbor and Path) return the Top-20 most relevant triples or paths, while the Web Evidence Tool (utilizing the Google Search API) returns the Top-5 text snippets. 

5.5 Main Results 

As shown in Table 3, SHARP outperforms all baseline models across all evaluation metrics on both the FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind datasets, achieving new State-of-the-Art results. The detailed comparative analysis is as follows:  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:17
> Table 3. The result of our method and other baseline methods on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Inductive benchmarks. Entries marked with ’-’ denote results not reported in original papers or where official imple-mentations were unavailable for faithful reproduction. The best results are highlighted in bold.

Method FB15K-237 Wikidata5M-Ind Accuracy F1 Precision Recall Accuracy F1 Precision Recall 

Embedding-based 

TransE 66.4 73.7 60.5 94.2 49.6 49.2 49.6 48.8 DistMult 61.2 70.9 56.7 94.4 50.2 50.7 51.4 50.1 RotatE 66.6 74.4 60.3 97.0 50.8 51.3 50.5 52.2 

PLM-based 

KG-BERT 66.3 72.0 62.2 85.5 - - - -SimKGC 69.8 72.5 66.6 79.4 78.4 78.9 76.9 81.1 

LLM(zero-shot) 

GPT-3.5-turbo 69.7 73.4 65.4 83.4 73.8 72.6 76.1 69.4 GPT-4o 77.3 73.9 86.8 64.4 77.6 72.6 93.1 59.6 Qwen3-max 76.6 73.7 84.3 65.4 74.5 67.7 92.4 53.4 

LLM(inference-Augmented) 

Qwen3-max(CoT) 81.4 80.1 86.0 75.0 80.5 77.4 92.0 66.8 Qwen3-max(S-C) 80.8 79.5 85.2 74.6 80.8 77.9 91.4 68.0 KGValidator 83.0 81.0 - - - - - -

Our Methods 

SHARP 87.2 86.6 91.2 82.4 93.7 93.4 98.7 88.6 

First, compared to traditional graph embedding models, SHARP improves accuracy and F1 score by an average of 22.5% and 13.6% respectively on FB15K-237, and by 43.5% and 43.0% on Wikidata5M-Ind. This is because SHARP integrates external tools, overcoming the limitations of models that rely solely on internal triple structural information. Second, compared to Pre-trained Language Model (PLM) baselines, our method demonstrates a significant advantage. We observe average improvements of 19.2% in accuracy and 14.4% in F1 on FB15K-237, along with average gains of 15.3% (Accuracy) and 14.5% (F1) on Wikidata5M-Ind. This performance gain is primarily attributed to SHARP transcending the Closed World Assumption. Instead of relying on static triple text, our framework actively retrieves information and reasons via the Agent architecture to form effective multi-hop reasoning chains. Furthermore, in comparison with general LLM-based reasoning methods, SHARP achieves average improvements of 9.1% in accuracy and 9.7% in F1 on FB15K-237, as well as 16.3% and 19.8% on Wikidata5M-Ind. These results indicate that static reasoning relying on parametric knowledge or simple external context is prone to hallucination. In contrast, our Schema-Aware Planning mechanism effectively mitigates noise through dynamic retrieval and constrained reasoning paths, substantially enhancing verification performance. Notably, SHARP achieves exceptional Precision while maintaining a high F1 score, reaching a remarkable 98.7% on Wikidata5M-Ind. This implies an extremely high confidence level in positive predictions, highlighting the immense potential of our model for application in high-stakes domains such as medicine and law, where stability is paramount. In addition, we conducted a Case Study and Error Analysis in Appendix C  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:18 Ma et al. 23.6%
> 27.3%
> 5.7%
> 27.9%
> 15.5%

FB15k -237 

KG Definition Tool  KG Neighbor Tool 

KG Path Tool  Wiki Evidence Tool 

Web Evidence Tool 

> 34.5%
> 19.6% 10.9%
> 15.2%
> 19.8%

Wikidata5M -Ind 

KG Definition Tool  KG Neighbor Tool 

KG Path Tool  Wiki Evidence Tool 

Web Evidence Tool 

> Fig. 7. Statistics of tool usage on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind

5.6 Tool Usage Analysis 

Figure 7 shows the frequency distribution of tool utilization for correctly predicted samples by SHARP on the FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind datasets. Statistically, the average number of tool invocations per triple verification is 9.8 on FB15K-237 and 6.6 on Wikidata5M-Ind. The overall distribution reveals that all pre-defined tools are actively employed with notable diversity. This confirms that a single knowledge source—whether solely structural or textual—is insufficient for complex verification tasks, necessitating the fusion of multi-source information for optimal performance. Specifically, the distinct characteristics of the datasets drive a shift in tool preferences. Given the prevalence of long-tail entities in Wikidata5M-Ind, the Agent most frequently invokes the KG Definition Tool (34.5%) to acquire fundamental semantic descriptions. In contrast, FB15K-237 involves more complex multi-hop reasoning, prompting the Agent to prioritize the Wikipedia Evidence Tool (27.9%) and KG Neighbor Tool (27.3%) to aggregate external textual evidence and internal neighborhood structures. This pattern not only reflects SHARP’s capability to flexibly schedule multi-source knowledge according to verification needs but also strongly demonstrates the effective, context-aware guidance provided by our Memory-Augmented mechanism and Schema-Aware planning strategy. 

> Table 4. Statistics of token and cost on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind

Dataset Avg. Interaction Turns Avg. Input token Avg. Output token Avg. Cost 

FB15K-237 9.8 23,031.39 2,275.24 $0.011 Wikidata5M-Ind 6.6 13,099.55 1,254.77 $0.006 

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026.

Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:19 FB15k -237  Wikidata5M -Ind                                    

> 69.7
> 77.3 76.6 73.8
> 77.6 74.5
> 70.5
> 80.5 83.1 81.6 80.9
> 84.8
> 78.4
> 84.9 87.2
> 83.0
> 89.2
> 93.7
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> GPT-3.5-turbo GPT-4o Qwen3-max GPT-3.5-turbo GPT-4o Qwen3-max
> Accuracy  (%)
> FB15k -237 Wikidata5M -Ind
> 73.4 73.9 73.7 72.6 72.6
> 67.7
> 74.5
> 80 82.1 81.7 83.3 86.4
> 77.3
> 82.8
> 86.6
> 82.2
> 88.2
> 93.4
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> GPT-3.5-turbo GPT-4o Qwen3-max GPT-3.5-turbo GPT-4o Qwen3-max
> F1  (%)
> GPT -3.5 -turbo
> GPT -3.5 -turbo + RAG
> GPT -3.5 -turbo + SHARP
> GPT -4o
> GPT -4o + RAG
> GPT -4o + SHARP
> Qwen3 -max Qwen3 -max + RAG Qwen3 -max + SHARP
> GPT -3.5 -turbo
> GPT -3.5 -turbo + RAG
> GPT -3.5 -turbo + SHARP
> GPT -4o
> GPT -4o + RAG
> GPT -4o + SHARP
> Qwen3 -max Qwen3 -max + RAG Qwen3 -max + SHARP

Fig. 8. Comparison of LLM vs. LLM + RAG vs. LLM + our Method on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind Datasets. The left side is Accuracy (%), and the right side is F1 (%). 

5.7 Efficiency and Cost Analysis 

To evaluate and optimize operational efficiency, we implemented a multi-threading concurrency mechanism configured with 50 threads. Under this setting, the system maintains robust stability. As presented in Table 4, the average inference latency of SHARP on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind is 1.86s and 1.26s, respectively. Regarding API costs and token consumption, statistics indicate that the average number of agent interactions per query is 9.8 on FB15K-237 and 6.6 on Wikidata5M-Ind. Specifically, the average number of input and output tokens is 23,031.39 and 2,275.24 for FB15K-237, while for Wikidata5M-Ind, the token counts are 13,099.55 and 1,254.77, respectively. Based on our empirical evaluation, the average expenditure per sample on the two datasets is approximately $0.011 and $0.006, respectively. Although our inference latency and cost are marginally higher than that of lightweight knowledge graph embedding models, the fundamental advantage of SHARP lies in its plug-and-play capability. Compared to baseline methods that require days of computationally expensive fine-tuning, our training-free paradigm significantly lowers the deployment threshold and overall computational overhead, demonstrating superior cost-effectiveness in practical applications. 

5.8 Agentic Reasoning vs. Standard RAG 

Compared with conventional methods, SHARP integrates a richer set of both internal and external evidence for triple verification. To further examine whether the performance gains of SHARP arise from the agent’s dynamic reasoning capability, rather than merely from increased data exposure or larger model capacity, we conduct a comparative study between Agentic Reasoning (i.e., multi-step dynamic reasoning driven by the SHARP agent) and Standard RAG (i.e., conventional retrieval-augmented generation). The experiments are conducted with three backbone large language models, namely GPT-3.5-Turbo, GPT-4o, and Qwen3-max, on the FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind datasets. 

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:20 Ma et al. 

> Table 5. Ablation Experiments Results. The values in red parentheses indicate the performance drop compared to the full SHARP model.

Method FB15K-237 Wikidata5M-Ind Accuracy F1 Accuracy F1 

SHARP 87.2 86.6 93.7 93.4 

w/o Memory-Augmented 81.0 (↓ 6.2%) 80.9 (↓ 5.7%) 86.8 (↓ 6.9%) 86.8 (↓ 6.6%) 

w/o Schema-Aware Planning 77.9 (↓ 9.3%) 76.7 (↓ 9.9%) 79.1 (↓ 14.6%) 76.7 (↓ 16.7%) 

w/o KG Tools 78.4 (↓ 8.8%) 77.2 (↓ 9.4%) 83.7 (↓ 10.0%) 81.9 (↓ 11.5%) 

w/o External Tools 75.70 (↓ 11.5%) 70.55 (↓ 16.0%) 80.5 (↓ 13.2%) 76.1 (↓ 17.3%) 

In the experimental setup, we transplant the retrieval functionality of the hybrid toolset into the retrieval component of the RAG pipeline, such that Standard RAG uses exactly the same information sources as SHARP. The only difference lies in the evidence integration mechanism: Standard RAG concatenates all retrieved information into the prompt in a single step, whereas SHARP dynamically integrates evidence through multi-step agent interactions and reasoning. In addition, we report the zero-shot performance of the three LLMs on this task as a reference baseline. As shown in Figure 8, Standard RAG consistently outperforms zero-shot LLMs across all three backbone models and both datasets, while SHARP further surpasses Standard RAG with clear improvements in both Accuracy and F1. This result demonstrates, on the one hand, the effectiveness of the retrieval-based internal–external knowledge fusion mechanism, and on the other hand, that the gains of SHARP cannot be attributed solely to a simple increase in available information. Instead, multi-step dynamic reasoning plays a central role in the performance improvement. In scenarios involving long textual contexts or high-density knowledge, conventional RAG systems often struggle to identify the most relevant evidence and lack sufficiently deep reasoning, making it difficult for LLMs to effectively resolve conflicts or filter redundant information from heavily concatenated contexts. In contrast, SHARP performs dynamic planning and stepwise verification, enabling more effective information distillation and more accurate reasoning, thereby substantially improving triple verification performance. 

5.9 Ablation Study 

To further investigate the contribution of each core component in SHARP to the knowledge graph verification task, we designed multiple sets of ablation experiments. By systematically removing specific modules, we constructed the following three variants: 

• w/o Memory-Augmented: This variant removes the memory-augmented mechanism while preserving schema-aware planning. It is introduced to assess whether accumulated historical experience contributes to a more stable reasoning initialization and more coherent multi-step investigation process. 

• w/o Schema-Aware Planning: This variant removes schema-aware planning while pre-serving the memory-augmented mechanism. It is designed to examine whether predefined schema constraints provide an effective inductive bias for guiding the agent toward a more reasonable reasoning starting point and investigation trajectory. 

• w/o KG Tools: This variant removes all graph-structured tools, including definition acqui-sition, neighbor querying, and path exploration, to evaluate the constraints provided by internal structured knowledge during the verification process.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:21

• w/o External Tools: This variant removes the Wikipedia evidence acquisition and web search tools, restricting the model to rely solely on internal graph information for prediction. This aims to verify the necessity of external open-domain knowledge when handling complex or outdated triples. Table 5 presents the performance of each variant on the two benchmark datasets (Wikidata5M-Ind and FB15K-237). The experimental results demonstrate that the removal of any single component leads to a significant performance degradation, which strongly substantiates the completeness and necessity of the SHARP collaborative framework: 

Analysis of w/o Memory-Augmented: Removing this module leads to an approximately 5% decline in both Accuracy and F1-score on Wikidata5M-Ind and FB15K-237. This suggests that the memory-augmented mechanism equips the Agent with reusable historical reasoning experience and expert trajectories, enabling it to learn informative investigation directions during multi-step verification. Without this module, the Agent suffers from a less stable reasoning initialization and struggles to inherit effective patterns accumulated from prior verification episodes, making it more prone to false judgments and missed detections in complex or long-tail factual scenarios. 

Analysis of w/o Schema-Aware Planning: The removal of this module results in accuracy drops of 14.6% and 9.3%, and F1-score drops of 16.7% and 9.9% on Wikidata5M-Ind and FB15K-237, respectively. The schema information not only provides global ontological constraints for the Agent but also mitigates the blindness of exploration during the cold-start phase via the memory mechanism. Lacking this module, the Agent struggles to accurately locate reasoning paths within the complex entity-relation network, making it highly susceptible to invalid circular reasoning or irrelevant noise. 

Analysis of w/o KG Tools: Removing the KG tools leads to an approximate 10% decline in both accuracy and F1-score across the two datasets. This confirms that the internal neighbor structures and path information of the graph provide essential contextual constraints for external evidence, effectively curbing the hallucination issues that LLMs may exhibit during fact verification. 

Analysis of w/o External Tools: Without external tools, the accuracy on Wikidata5M-Ind and FB15K-237 decreases by 13.2% and 11.5%, and the F1-score decreases by 17.3% and 16.0%, respectively. External tools introduce real-time and rich semantic corpora, providing the Agent with “factual evidence” that transcends the triples themselves. The experiments demonstrate that the integration of internal and external knowledge is crucial for resolving complex and long-range verification tasks. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we proposed SHARP, a training-free framework that reframes knowledge graph triple verification as a dynamic planning–retrieval–reasoning process. By integrating Schema-Aware Planning with a Memory-Augmented Mechanism, SHARP mitigates reasoning instability and enables effective coordination between internal structural logic and external semantic evidence through a Hybrid Knowledge Toolset. Experiments on FB15K-237 and Wikidata5M-Ind demonstrate that SHARP consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in a training-free setting. Moreover, SHARP provides transparent, fact-based evidence chains alongside strong verification performance, showing its effectiveness, robustness, and interpretability for complex triple verification tasks. 

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026.

0:22 Ma et al. 

Acknowledgments 

The research in this article is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U22B2059, 62276083) and by the Key Research and Development Program of Heilongjiang Province (2022ZX01A28). 

References 

[1] Garima Agrawal, Tharindu Kumarage, Zeyad Alghamdi, and Huan Liu. 2024. Can Knowledge Graphs Reduce Hallucinations in LLMs? : A Survey. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), NAACL 2024, Mexico City, Mexico, June 16-21, 2024 , Kevin Duh, Helena Gómez-Adorno, and Steven Bethard (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 3947–3960. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.NAACL-LONG.219 [2] Gabriel Amaral, Odinaldo Rodrigues, and Elena Simperl. 2024. ProVe: A pipeline for automated provenance verification of knowledge graphs against textual sources. Semantic Web 15, 6 (2024), 2159–2192. doi:10.3233/SW-233467 [3] Ivana Balazevic, Carl Allen, and Timothy M. Hospedales. 2019. TuckER: Tensor Factorization for Knowledge Graph Completion. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019 , Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 5184–5193. doi:10.18653/V1/D19-1522 [4] Haonan Bian. 2025. LLM-empowered knowledge graph construction: A survey. CoRR abs/2510.20345 (2025). arXiv:2510.20345 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2510.20345 [5] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto García-Durán, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating Embeddings for Modeling Multi-relational Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26: 27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2013. Proceedings of a meeting held December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States , Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon Bottou, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Kilian Q. Weinberger (Eds.). 2787–2795. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/hash/1cecc7a77928ca8133fa24680a88d2f9-Abstract.html [6] Jack Boylan, Demian Gholipour Ghalandari, Chris Hokamp, Dominic Thorn, Parsa Ghaffari, and Shashank Mangla. 2024. KGValidator: A Framework for Automatic Validation of Knowledge Graph Construction. In Joint proceedings of the 3rd International workshop on knowledge graph generation from text (TEXT2KG) and Data Quality meets Machine Learning and Knowledge Graphs (DQMLKG) co-located with the Extended Semantic Web Conference ( ESWC 2024), Hersonissos, Greece, May 26-30, 2024 (CEUR Workshop Proceedings) , Sanju Tiwari, Nandana Mihindukulasooriya, Francesco Osborne, Dimitris Kontokostas, Jennifer D’Souza, Mayank Kejriwal, Maria Angela Pellegrino, Anisa Rula, José Emilio Labra Gayo, Michael Cochez, and Mehwish Alam (Eds.). CEUR-WS.org, 23. https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3747/text2kg_paper12.pdf [7] Tim Dettmers, Pasquale Minervini, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel. 2018. Convolutional 2D Knowledge Graph Embeddings. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018 , Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger (Eds.). AAAI Press, 1811–1818. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V32I1.11573 [8] Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Jason Weston. 2024. Chain-of-Verification Reduces Hallucination in Large Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 11-16, 2024 (Findings of ACL) ,Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 3563–3578. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.FINDINGS-ACL.212 [9] Luis Antonio Galárraga, Christina Teflioudi, Katja Hose, and Fabian M. Suchanek. 2013. AMIE: association rule mining under incomplete evidence in ontological knowledge bases. In 22nd International World Wide Web Conference, WWW ’13, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, May 13-17, 2013 , Daniel Schwabe, Virgílio A. F. Almeida, Hartmut Glaser, Ricardo Baeza-Yates, and Sue B. Moon (Eds.). International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee / ACM, 413–422. doi:10.1145/2488388.2488425 [10] Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan, Vincent Y. Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and Kelvin Guu. 2023. RARR: Researching and Revising What Language Models Say, Using Language Models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 16477–16508. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-LONG.910 [11] Qingyu Guo, Fuzhen Zhuang, Chuan Qin, Hengshu Zhu, Xing Xie, Hui Xiong, and Qing He. 2023. A Survey on Knowledge Graph-Based Recommender Systems : Extended Abstract. In 39th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2023, Anaheim, CA, USA, April 3-7, 2023 . IEEE, 3803–3804. doi:10.1109/ICDE55515.2023.00328 ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:23 

[12] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024. MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum? id=VtmBAGCN7o [13] Jinhao Jiang, Kun Zhou, Xin Zhao, Yang Song, Chen Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. KG-Agent: An Efficient Autonomous Agent Framework for Complex Reasoning over Knowledge Graph. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 9505–9523. https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.468/ [14] Yunshi Lan, Gaole He, Jinhao Jiang, Jing Jiang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Complex Knowledge Base Question Answering: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 35, 11 (2023), 11196–11215. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2022.3223858 [15] Ni Lao and William W. Cohen. 2010. Relational retrieval using a combination of path-constrained random walks. 

Mach. Learn. 81, 1 (2010), 53–67. doi:10.1007/S10994-010-5205-8 [16] Xinyi Li, Yongfeng Zhang, and Edward C. Malthouse. 2024. Large Language Model Agentic Approach to Fact Checking and Fake News Detection. In ECAI 2024 - 27th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 19-24 October 2024, Santiago de Compostela, Spain - Including 13th Conference on Prestigious Applications of Intelligent Systems (PAIS 2024) (Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications) , Ulle Endriss, Francisco S. Melo, Kerstin Bach, Alberto José Bugarín Diz, Jose Maria Alonso-Moral, Senén Barro, and Fredrik Heintz (Eds.). IOS Press, 2572–2579. doi:10.3233/FAIA240787 [17] Yu Li, Yi Huang, Guilin Qi, Junlan Feng, Nan Hu, Songlin Zhai, Haohan Xue, Yongrui Chen, Ruoyan Shen, and Tongtong Wu. 2025. Harnessing Diverse Perspectives: A Multi-agent Framework for Enhanced Error Detection in Knowledge Graphs. In Database Systems for Advanced Applications - 30th International Conference, DASFAA 2025, Singapore, Singapore, May 26-29, 2025, Proceedings, Part VI (Lecture Notes in Computer Science) , Feida Zhu, Philip S. Yu, Akiyo Nadamoto, Ee-Peng Lim, Kyuseok Shim, Wei Ding, and Bingxue Zhang (Eds.). Springer, 446–458. doi:10.1007/978-981-95-4158-4_32 [18] Jiashi Lin, Lifang Wang, Xinyu Lu, Zhongtian Hu, Wei Zhang, and Wenxuan Lu. 2024. Improving Knowledge Graph Completion with Structure-Aware Supervised Contrastive Learning. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November 12-16, 2024 , Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 13948–13959. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-MAIN.772 [19] Runxuan Liu, Luobei Luobei, Jiaqi Li, Baoxin Wang, Ming Liu, Dayong Wu, Shijin Wang, and Bing Qin. 2025. Ontology-Guided Reverse Thinking Makes Large Language Models Stronger on Knowledge Graph Question Answering. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 15269–15284. https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.741/ [20] Xiangyu Liu, Yang Liu, and Wei Hu. 2024. Knowledge Graph Error Detection with Contrastive Confidence Adaption. In 

Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada , Michael J. Wooldridge, Jennifer G. Dy, and Sriraam Natarajan (Eds.). AAAI Press, 8824–8831. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V38I8.28729 [21] Linhao Luo, Yuan-Fang Li, Gholamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. 2024. Reasoning on Graphs: Faithful and Interpretable Large Language Model Reasoning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZGNWW7xZ6Q [22] Jie Ma, Zhitao Gao, Qi Chai, Wangchun Sun, Pinghui Wang, Hongbin Pei, Jing Tao, Lingyun Song, Jun Liu, Chen Zhang, and Lizhen Cui. 2025. Debate on Graph: A Flexible and Reliable Reasoning Framework for Large Language Models. In Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Thirty-Seventh Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Fifteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA, February 25 - March 4, 2025 , Toby Walsh, Julie Shah, and Zico Kolter (Eds.). AAAI Press, 24768–24776. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V39I23.34658 [23] Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J. F. Gales. 2023. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-Resource Black-Box Hallucination Detection for Generative Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 , Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 9004–9017. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.557 [24] Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore: Fine-grained Atomic Evaluation of Factual Precision in Long Form Text Generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 , Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:24 Ma et al. 

Linguistics, 12076–12100. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.741 [25] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. CoRR abs/2303.08774 (2023). arXiv:2303.08774 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2303.08774 [26] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 ,Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_ files/paper/2022/hash/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html [27] Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. 2024. Unifying Large Language Models and Knowledge Graphs: A Roadmap. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 36, 7 (2024), 3580–3599. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2024. 3352100 [28] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023 , Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html [29] Michael Sejr Schlichtkrull, Thomas N. Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling. 2018. Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks. In The Semantic Web - 15th International Conference, ESWC 2018, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, June 3-7, 2018, Proceedings (Lecture Notes in Computer Science) , Aldo Gangemi, Roberto Navigli, Maria-Esther Vidal, Pascal Hitzler, Raphaël Troncy, Laura Hollink, Anna Tordai, and Mehwish Alam (Eds.). Springer, 593–607. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-93417-4_38 [30] Farzad Shami, Stefano Marchesin, and Gianmaria Silvello. 2025. Fact Verification in Knowledge Graphs Using LLMs. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2025, Padua, Italy, July 13-18, 2025 , Nicola Ferro, Maria Maistro, Gabriella Pasi, Omar Alonso, Andrew Trotman, and Suzan Verberne (Eds.). ACM, 3985–3989. doi:10.1145/3726302.3730142 [31] Jianhao Shen, Chenguang Wang, Ye Yuan, Jiawei Han, Heng Ji, Koushik Sen, Ming Zhang, and Dawn Song. 2022. PALT: Parameter-Lite Transfer of Language Models for Knowledge Graph Completion. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 7-11, 2022 (Findings of ACL) ,Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 3833–3847. doi:10.18653/V1/2022.FINDINGS-EMNLP.281 [32] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023 , Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_ files/paper/2023/hash/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html [33] Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M. Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. 2024. Think-on-Graph: Deep and Responsible Reasoning of Large Language Model on Knowledge Graph. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 .OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=nnVO1PvbTv [34] Zhiqing Sun, Zhi-Hong Deng, Jian-Yun Nie, and Jian Tang. 2019. RotatE: Knowledge Graph Embedding by Relational Rotation in Complex Space. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=HkgEQnRqYQ [35] Zafar Habeeb Syed, Michael Röder, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. 2018. FactCheck: Validating RDF Triples Using Textual Evidence. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM 2018, Torino, Italy, October 22-26, 2018 , Alfredo Cuzzocrea, James Allan, Norman W. Paton, Divesh Srivastava, Rakesh Agrawal, Andrei Z. Broder, Mohammed J. Zaki, K. Selçuk Candan, Alexandros Labrinidis, Assaf Schuster, and Haixun Wang (Eds.). ACM, 1599–1602. doi:10.1145/3269206.3269308 [36] Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. CoRR abs/2505.09388 (2025). arXiv:2505.09388 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2505. 09388 [37] James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018. FEVER: a Large-scale Dataset for Fact Extraction and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , Marilyn A. Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 809–819. doi:10.18653/V1/N18-1074 ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:25 

[38] Armin Toroghi, Willis Guo, Mohammad Mahdi Abdollah Pour, and Scott Sanner. 2024. Right for Right Reasons: Large Language Models for Verifiable Commonsense Knowledge Graph Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November 12-16, 2024 ,Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 6601–6633. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-MAIN.378 [39] Kristina Toutanova and Danqi Chen. 2015. Observed versus latent features for knowledge base and text inference. In 

Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Continuous Vector Space Models and their Compositionality, CVSC 2015, Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015 , Alexandre Allauzen, Edward Grefenstette, Karl Moritz Hermann, Hugo Larochelle, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 57–66. doi:10.18653/V1/W15-4007 [40] Théo Trouillon, Johannes Welbl, Sebastian Riedel, Éric Gaussier, and Guillaume Bouchard. 2016. Complex Embeddings for Simple Link Prediction. In Proceedings of the 33nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2016, New York City, NY, USA, June 19-24, 2016 (JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings) , Maria-Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (Eds.). JMLR.org, 2071–2080. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/trouillon16.html [41] Shikhar Vashishth, Soumya Sanyal, Vikram Nitin, and Partha P. Talukdar. 2020. Composition-based Multi-Relational Graph Convolutional Networks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=BylA_C4tPr [42] David Wadden, Shanchuan Lin, Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Madeleine van Zuylen, Arman Cohan, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Fact or Fiction: Verifying Scientific Claims. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020 , Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 7534–7550. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.EMNLP-MAIN.609 [43] Liang Wang, Wei Zhao, Zhuoyu Wei, and Jingming Liu. 2022. SimKGC: Simple Contrastive Knowledge Graph Completion with Pre-trained Language Models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022 , Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 4281–4294. doi:10.18653/V1/ 2022.ACL-LONG.295 [44] Xiaozhi Wang, Tianyu Gao, Zhaocheng Zhu, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Juanzi Li, and Jian Tang. 2021. KEPLER: A Unified Model for Knowledge Embedding and Pre-trained Language Representation. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 

9 (2021), 176–194. doi:10.1162/TACL_A_00360 [45] Xiaozhi Wang, Tianyu Gao, Zhaocheng Zhu, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Juanzi Li, and Jian Tang. 2021. KEPLER: A Unified Model for Knowledge Embedding and Pre-trained Language Representation. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 

9 (2021), 176–194. doi:10.1162/TACL_A_00360 [46] Xintao Wang, Qianyu He, Jiaqing Liang, and Yanghua Xiao. 2022. Language Models as Knowledge Embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022 , Luc De Raedt (Ed.). ijcai.org, 2291–2297. doi:10.24963/IJCAI.2022/318 [47] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw [48] Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. 2014. Knowledge Graph Embedding by Translating on Hyperplanes. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, July 27 -31, 2014, Québec City, Québec, Canada , Carla E. Brodley and Peter Stone (Eds.). AAAI Press, 1112–1119. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V28I1.8870 [49] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 , Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html [50] Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, and Quoc V. Le. 2024. Long-form factuality in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 , Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ 937ae0e83eb08d2cb8627fe1def8c751-Abstract-Conference.html [51] Yanbin Wei, Qiushi Huang, Yu Zhang, and James T. Kwok. 2023. KICGPT: Large Language Model with Knowledge in Context for Knowledge Graph Completion. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 (Findings of ACL) , Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 8667–8683. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.580 ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:26 Ma et al. 

[52] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. 2023. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation Framework. CoRR 

abs/2308.08155 (2023). arXiv:2308.08155 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2308.08155 [53] Zongzong Wu, Fengxiao Tang, Ming Zhao, and Yufeng Li. 2024. KGV: Integrating Large Language Models with Knowledge Graphs for Cyber Threat Intelligence Credibility Assessment. CoRR abs/2408.08088 (2024). arXiv:2408.08088 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2408.08088 [54] Derong Xu, Ziheng Zhang, Zhenxi Lin, Xian Wu, Zhihong Zhu, Tong Xu, Xiangyu Zhao, Yefeng Zheng, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Multi-perspective Improvement of Knowledge Graph Completion with Large Language Models. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC/COLING 2024, 20-25 May, 2024, Torino, Italy , Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Véronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (Eds.). ELRA and ICCL, 11956–11968. https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.1044 [55] Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. 2015. Embedding Entities and Relations for Learning and Inference in Knowledge Bases. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings , Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (Eds.). http: //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6575 [56] Fan Yang, Zhilin Yang, and William W. Cohen. 2017. Differentiable Learning of Logical Rules for Knowledge Base Reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (Eds.). 2319–2328. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper/2017/hash/0e55666a4ad822e0e34299df3591d979-Abstract.html [57] Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. 2019. KG-BERT: BERT for Knowledge Graph Completion. CoRR 

abs/1909.03193 (2019). arXiv:1909.03193 http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03193 [58] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Syner-gizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X [59] Fu Zhang, Yifan Ding, and Jingwei Cheng. 2024. ATAP: Automatic Template-Augmented Commonsense Knowledge Graph Completion via Pre-Trained Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November 12-16, 2024 , Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 16456–16472. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-MAIN.919 [60] Yichi Zhang, Zhuo Chen, Lingbing Guo, Yajing Xu, Wen Zhang, and Huajun Chen. 2024. Making Large Language Models Perform Better in Knowledge Graph Completion. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM 2024, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 28 October 2024 - 1 November 2024 , Jianfei Cai, Mohan S. Kankanhalli, Balakrishnan Prabhakaran, Susanne Boll, Ramanathan Subramanian, Liang Zheng, Vivek K. Singh, Pablo César, Lexing Xie, and Dong Xu (Eds.). ACM, 233–242. doi:10.1145/3664647.3681327 [61] Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Shafiq Joty, Chengwei Qin, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Verify-and-Edit: A Knowledge-Enhanced Chain-of-Thought Framework. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 5823–5840. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-LONG.320 

Appendices A Evaluation metrics 

We adopt four fundamental metrics widely adopted in classification tasks to quantify model performance: Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score. Their formal definitions and mathematical formulations are as follows, where: 𝑇 𝑃 (true positives) denotes the count of positive instances correctly predicted; 𝑇 𝑁 (true negatives) denotes the count of negative instances correctly predicted; 

𝐹 𝑃 (false positives) denotes the count of negative instances incorrectly predicted as positive; and 𝐹 𝑁 

(false negatives) denotes the count of positive instances incorrectly predicted as negative. Accuracy measures the overall proportion of correct predictions among all instances: Accuracy = 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝑇 𝑁 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝑇 𝑁 + 𝐹 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑁 

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:27 

Precision quantifies the reliability of positive predictions, i.e., the proportion of predicted positives that are actually positive: Precision = 𝑇 𝑃 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑃 

Recall quantifies the completeness of positive predictions, i.e., the proportion of actual positives that are correctly identified: Recall = 𝑇 𝑃 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑁 

F1-score is the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, balancing their trade-off to provide a single metric for overall performance: F1-score = 2 × Precision × Recall Precision + Recall 

B Memory-Augmented trajectory case 

To demonstrate the quality of the expert knowledge stored in our Memory Bank, we present a complete reasoning trajectory in Figure 9. This example illustrates how SHARP validates the triple 

(Elon Musk, CEO, Tesla) . The trajectory showcases the agent’s systematic approach: (1) Schema Grounding : Verifying the precise definitions of entities and relations in the KG (Steps 1 & 2); (2) 

Structural Verification : Exploring internal connectivity within the KG (Step 3); (3) External Cross-Validation : seeking real-world evidence via web search when internal paths are implicit (Step 4). Such high-quality trajectories serve as few-shot demonstrations to guide the agent in handling similar complex queries. 

C Case Study and Error Analysis 

In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of two representative reasoning trajectories of SHARP to illustrate its decision-making process and typical error modes. These cases highlight how the agent synthesizes internal knowledge graph structures with external semantic verification. 

Success Case Analysis (Biological Kingdom Boundary). As shown in Figure 10, the agent correctly refuted a triple claiming a rodent species (Kemp’s Thicket Rat) belongs to a plant genus (Gliricidia). The agent demonstrated high-level ontological reasoning by first identifying the disparate biological kingdoms: Animalia for the mammal and Plantae for the plant genus. By confirming the absence of structural paths in the KG and finding no contradicting external evidence, the agent successfully leveraged the principle of taxonomic hierarchy to provide a robust, interpretable rejection. 

Failure Case Analysis (Temporal Contradiction). Figure 11 illustrates a failure mode related to temporal constraints. While the agent correctly identified the head entity Dat Nguyen and his affiliation with Texas A&M football, it failed to account for the dataset’s specific ground truth logic regarding time-sliced entities. The agent identified a chronological impossibility—the player was born in 1975, while the triple specified the 1930s—and thus labeled it Incorrect. However, this case was marked True in the original dataset, likely due to a misalignment between the general relationship and the specific temporal tail entity. This failure reveals the agent’s tendency to prioritize strict logical consistency over potential data noise or relaxed temporal matching.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:28 Ma et al.

Memory Trajectory Case: (Elon Musk, CEO, Tesla) 

Target Triple: "Elon Musk, CEO, Tesla" 

• Thought 1: I need to first confirm the identity and type of "Elon Musk" to ensure we are referring to the correct person. 

• Action 1: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (entity=’Elon Musk’) 

• Observation 1: 

Entity Profile: Q317521 Label: Elon Musk; Description: businessman and entrepreneur (born 1971); Type: human; Aliases: Elon Reeve Musk. 

• Thought 2: The entity ’Elon Musk’ correctly refers to the businessman. Next, I should search for the definition of the "CEO" relationship to ensure my understanding is accurate. 

• Action 2: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (relation=’CEO’) 

• Observation 2: 

Relation Profile: P169 Label: chief executive officer; Description: highest-ranking corporate officer appointed as the CEO within an organization; Aliases: executive director, chief executive, CEO; Subject Constraint (Domain): None defined (Open Domain / Any); Object Constraint (Range); presidential term; fictional facility; facility; editorial collection; fictional organization; event; project; organization; fictional company; branch office 

• Thought 3: The relation ’CEO’ means the highest-ranking corporate officer. Next, I will verify if there is a direct or 2-hop connection between Elon Musk and Tesla regarding the "CEO" relationship. 

• Action 3: KG_Path_Tool (entity_a=’Elon Musk’, entity_b=’Tesla’) 

• Observation 3: 

(Elon Musk) –> [employer] –> (Tesla, Inc.) (Elon Musk) <– [owned by] <– (Tesla, Inc.) (Elon Musk) –[unmarried partner]–> (Shivon Zilis) –[employer]–> (Tesla, Inc.) ...... 

• Thought 4: The knowledge base indicates a direct relationship: (Elon Musk) <– [owner] <– (Tesla), suggesting that the candidate triple is likely correct. However, to ensure factual accuracy, I will conduct cross-validation using external network evidence. 

• Action 4: Web_Evidence_Tool (question=’Is Elon Musk the CEO of Tesla?’) 

• Observation 4: 

Snippet 1: "...Tesla CEO Elon Musk Gets a Long Do-Not-Tweet List From the SEC..." (Source: Barron’s) Snippet 2: "...Elon Musk is the co-founder and CEO of Tesla..." (Source: Official Bio) ...... 

• Thought 5: Based on the current evidence, it is sufficient to prove the triple. 

• Final Answer: [Correct] Because the knowledge base explicitly states that Elon Musk is the employer/owner of Tesla, Inc., and this is corroborated by multiple credible web sources confirming his role as CEO. 

Fig. 9. A representative reasoning trajectory from the Memory Bank. This case demonstrates the “Think-Act-Observation” loop where the agent fuses KG structural info with Web evidence.  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. Schema-Aware Planning and Hybrid Knowledge Toolset for Reliable Knowledge Graph Triple Verification 0:29

Successful Verification Trajectory 

Target Triple: (kemp’s thicket rat, parent taxon, gliricidia) Ground Truth: False Verdict: 

[Incorrect] 

• Thought 1: I need to first confirm the biological classification and taxonomic rank of "kemp’s thicket rat" to understand what kind of entity it is and whether it could logically have a "parent taxon" relationship with "gliricidia". 

• Action 1: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (entity: "kemp’s thicket rat") 

• Observation 1: Label: Kemp’s Thicket Rat; Description: species of mammal; Type: taxon; Aliases: Thamnomys kempi. 

• Thought 2: The entity "Kemp’s Thicket Rat" is confirmed as a taxon and specifically a species of mammal. Next, I need to verify what "Gliricidia" refers to. 

• Action 2: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (entity: "gliricidia") 

• Observation 2: Label: Gliricidia; Description: genus of plants; Type: taxon. 

• Thought 3: Both are confirmed as taxa, but they belong to entirely different biological kingdoms: Animalia (mammal) vs. Plantae (plant genus). A parent taxon relationship cannot cross kingdom boundaries. I will check for any structural paths. 

• Action 3: KG_Path_Tool (entity_a: "kemp’s thicket rat", entity_b: "gliricidia") 

• Observation 3: No direct,2-hop or 3-hop paths found between Q1761125 and Q12549487. 

• Thought 4: The knowledge graph shows no structural paths, which aligns with biological expectations. I will perform a final web search to rule out any obscure claims. 

• Action 4: Web_Evidence_Tool (question: "Is Kemp’s thicket rat taxonomically related to Gliri-cidia?") 

• Observation 4: No relevant webpages found (API returned empty). 

• Final Answer: [Incorrect] Because "Kemp’s thicket rat" is a mammalian species (Animalia), while "Gliricidia" is a genus of plants (Plantae). The "parent taxon" relationship strictly applies within a lineage and cannot cross kingdom boundaries. The KG confirms no structural path exists, consistent with biological classification principles. 

Fig. 10. Success Case: Cross-Kingdom Ontological Reasoning  

> ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: April 2026. 0:30 Ma et al.

Error Verification Trajectory 

Target Triple: (Nguy ˜en T ´an Ða . t, member of sports team, texas a&m aggies football(1930-1939)) 

Ground Truth: True Agent Prediction: [Incorrect] (Error) 

• Thought 1: I need to first verify the identity and background of "Nguy ˜e n T ´an Ð a. t" to determine if this person could plausibly have been associated with a U.S. college football team in the 1930s. 

• Action 1: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (entity: "Nguy ˜en T ´an Ða . t") 

• Observation 1: Label: Dat Nguyen; Description: All-American college football player; Aliases: Dat Tan Nguyen. 

• Thought 2: This refers to Dat Nguyen, a modern player. I need to check the team entity "texas a&m aggies football, 1930-1939" to see if it exists as a distinct time-sliced entity. 

• Action 2: KG_Basic_Info_Tool (entity: "texas a&m aggies football, 1930-1939") 

• Observation 2: Label: Texas A&M Aggies football; Description: University American football team. 

• Thought 3: The KG only contains the general team entity. I will check the player’s birth date and team membership to verify the 1930s timeframe. 

• Action 3: KG_Neighbor_Tool (entity: "Nguy ˜en T ´an Ða . t", relation: "member of sports team") 

• Observation 3: [member of sports team] -> Texas A&M Aggies football; [date of birth] -> 1975-09-25. 

• Thought 4: Dat Nguyen was born in 1975, making it chronologically impossible for him to have played in the 1930s. I will perform a final web search for any historical namesake. 

• Action 4: Web_Evidence_Tool (question: "Was there a Vietnamese player named Dat Nguyen on Texas A&M in the 1930s?") 

• Observation 4: No relevant webpages found (API returned empty). 

• Final Answer: [Incorrect] Because Nguy ˜e n T ´a n Ð a. t (Dat Nguyen) was born in 1975 and played for Texas A&M in the 1990s, making it chronologically impossible for him to be a member between 1930 and 1939. 

Fig. 11. Failure Case: Chronological Impossibility and Data Noise