Title: Structure-Grounded Knowledge Retrieval via Code Dependencies for Multi-Step Data Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10516v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:18:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Structure-Grounded Knowledge Retrieval via Code Dependencies for Multi-Step Data Reasoning 

Xinyi Huang 1†, Mingzhe Lu 2†, Haoyu Dong 3

> 1

Simon Fraser University, 2University of Science and Technology of China, 3Microsoft 

Abstract 

Selecting the right knowledge is critical when using large language models (LLMs) to solve domain-specific data analysis tasks. How-ever, most retrieval-augmented approaches rely primarily on lexical or embedding similarity, which is often a weak proxy for the task-critical knowledge needed for multi-step rea-soning. In many such tasks, the relevant knowl-edge is not merely textually related to the query, but is instead grounded in executable code and the dependency structure through which computations are carried out. To address this mismatch, we propose SGKR (Structure-Grounded Knowledge Retrieval), a retrieval framework that organizes domain knowledge with a graph induced by function-call depen-dencies. Given a question, SGKR extracts se-mantic input and output tags, identifies depen-dency paths connecting them, and constructs a task-relevant subgraph. The associated knowl-edge and corresponding function implementa-tions are then assembled as a structured context for LLM-based code generation. Experiments on multi-step data analysis benchmarks show that SGKR consistently improves solution cor-rectness over no-retrieval and similarity-based retrieval baselines for both vanilla LLMs and coding agents. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have recently shown strong capabilities in generating executable programs for complex reasoning and data analysis tasks (Chen et al., 2021a; Huang et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Lai et al., 2023). However, domain-specific data analysis tasks of-ten involve numerical computations, hard-coded business rules, and structured data operations such as filtering, joining, aggregation, and conditional transformation (Chen et al., 2021b, 2022), which  

> †Work done during the authors’ internships at Microsoft.

makes code generation substantially more challeng-ing. In such scenarios, the correctness of generated programs heavily depends on whether the model can access and apply the appropriate domain knowl-edge. Similar challenges have been observed in related structured generation tasks such as text-to-SQL. For example, in the popular BIRD bench-mark (Li et al., 2023), prior work has shown that providing LLMs with domain knowledge or “evi-dence” about the database — such as explanations of abbreviated medical terms in column names or clarifications of subtle calculation rules like ratio definitions — can drastically boost SQL generation accuracy (Agarwal et al., 2026). These examples highlight a broader issue: beyond general reasoning and coding ability, LLMs often fail due to the lack of specific domain knowledge needed to produce the correct program. The knowledge gap challenge becomes even more pronounced in broader, multi-step data analy-sis tasks, where models may need to discover latent computational rules, business logic, or function-level dependencies that are essential for solving the task. To mitigate this issue, recent work commonly adopts retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Feng et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2021; Rani et al., 2024; Mavromatis and Karypis, 2024), where relevant knowledge stored in knowledge graphs or free-text documentation is retrieved and supplied to the model as additional context. Most existing retrieval approaches rely primar-ily on lexical matching (Robertson et al., 1994) or embedding similarity (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Xiong et al.) between the input query and a given knowledge base. More recent graph-based RAG methods organize retrieved information as graphs, but still require embedding similarity to identify rel-evant nodes or subgraphs (Han et al., 2025). While effective for knowledge-intensive question answer-ing, these approaches assume that relevant knowl-edge can be retrieved as independent text fragments. 1

> arXiv:2604.10516v1 [cs.CL] 12 Apr 2026

However, in data analysis tasks, solving a problem requires composing interdependent computational steps, where correctness depends not only on re-trieving relevant knowledge, but also on retrieving the right set of functionally connected operations. However, in many domain-specific data analysis tasks, the knowledge required to solve a problem is encapsulated implicitly in code. Furthermore, function-call dependencies provide a structural sig-nal of knowledge relevance: if a function A invokes another function B, the dependency often reflects that the callee (B) contributes logic flow or knowl-edge required by the caller (A). Therefore, rele-vant knowledge may be connected through code dependencies, even when the functions may only be weakly related to the input query in lexical or embedding space. Motivated by the observation above, we pro-pose Structure-Grounded Knowledge Retrieval (SGKR), a framework that organizes domain knowledge as a code dependency graph derived from function-call relations. Given a new question, the system extracts key input and output entities from the query as semantic I/O tags — such as data entities, attributes, and target derived quantities — maps these tags to relevant functions input/output in the code graph, and identifies dependency paths among these functions to construct a task-relevant subgraph. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce Structure-Grounded Knowl-edge Retrieval (SGKR) , a retrieval frame-work that organizes domain knowledge along with a code dependency graph and retrieves relevant knowledge through dependency paths between input and output entities. • To organize knowledge as a graph, we propose to structure domain knowledge based on its usage in code by associating knowledge with corresponding functions and organizing them through code dependency relations. • Experiments on multiple multi-step data anal-ysis benchmarks demonstrate that SGKR significantly improves solution correctness over no-retrieval and similarity-based retrieval baselines while retrieving substantially less context. 

2 Structure-Grounded Knowledge Graph 

In this section, we show how to ground abstract knowledge as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) through function dependencies, where each piece of knowledge is mapped to its corresponding func-tion. 

2.1 RQ1: How to define a knowledge unit? 

Standard RAG treats knowledge as unstructured text and relies on embedding-based retrieval. How-ever, in data analysis tasks, knowledge is often operationalized through executable functions that perform intermediate computations. Therefore, rep-resenting knowledge purely as text fails to capture its functional role in reasoning. To better align with programmatic reasoning, we define a knowledge unit as a function together with its associated domain knowledge. By bind-ing knowledge to functions, each function serves as a carrier of domain knowledge, while function calls encode how these knowledge units interact. This representation allows knowledge to be orga-nized according to executable structure rather than isolated textual fragments. 

2.2 RQ2: How is knowledge connected? 

After binding functions with their associated knowl-edge, functions become carriers of domain knowl-edge, and function calls define explicit connections between knowledge units. Although knowledge itself cannot always be precisely parsed, the func-tion code that implements it exposes clear depen-dency structures. As a result, relevant knowledge is implicitly connected through code dependencies rather than surface-level similarity. If a function f1 calls f2, we add a directed edge 

f1 → f2, indicating that f1 depends on the knowl-edge implemented in f2. This structure naturally captures how knowledge is propagated across com-putation steps. 

2.3 RQ3: How to measure relevance of knowledge? 

Standard similarity-based retrieval assumes that relevant knowledge is semantically similar to the query. However, this assumption often fails in pro-grammatic data analysis. As illustrated in Figure 2 using an example from the DAB STEP (Egg et al., 2025) benchmark, functions with high embedding similarity (e.g., check_month_volumn ) may be ir-relevant to the task, while necessary functions (e.g., 2Knowledge and Corresponding Functions from Q1 embedding                     

> similarity
> relevance
> by LLM
> needed
> by Q2
> Knowledge : rate to be specified to be multiplied by
> the transaction value and divided by 10000
> Function :compute_fee () :# compute fee
> 0.324 ✔✔
> Knowledge : month_volumn affects fee and needs
> range matching; it is by natural months
> Function: check_month_volume () :# compute
> month volume, normalize units and match range
> 0.306 ✔✖
> Knowledge : null values in some attributes should be
> treated as applying to all conditions
> Function: null_attribute_handling () :# null value
> handling for certain attributes
> 0.301 not sure ✔
> Knowledge : fraud_level affects fee; fraud level
> computation and definition; it is by natural months
> Function :check_monthly_fraud_level () :#
> compute month fraud level and match range
> 0.340 not sure ✖
> Knowledge :international transaction fees are higher
> Function: check_intracountry () :# check if issuer
> country and the acquiring country are the same
> 0.258 ✖✔
> Example Question (Q1)
> For merchant A in January, if we were to move the
> fraudulent transactions towards a different
> Authorization Characteristics Indicator (ACI), what
> would be the preferred choice considering the
> lowest possible fees?
> New Question (Q2)
> For a credit transaction of 10 euros on NexPay,
> what would be the most expensive Authorization
> Characteristics Indicator (ACI)?
> null_attribute
> _handling
> check_monthly
> _fraud_level
> check_
> intracountry
> check_month
> _volume
> compute_fee
> fee_amount
> payment
> attribute
> merchant
> attribute
> output
> tag
> input
> tag
> input
> tag

Figure 1: Comparison among (1) embedding-based similarity between the new task and candidate code snippets, (2) LLM (GPT-5.2) predictions of whether code snippets are required, and (3) ground-truth annotations indicating whether code snippets are actually needed. For similarity computation, we use the openai/text-embedding-3-large model, embedding both function definitions and their natural-language summaries. 

check_intracountry ), which encode critical do-main knowledge (e.g., fees depend on whether a transaction is international ), may have low simi-larity scores and be overlooked. In contrast, we observe that the needed knowl-edge is correctly captured by the common function dependency between Q1 and Q2, as shown in de-pendency graph of Figure 2. The directed graph illustrates the function-call structure of the solution to Q1 (not shown in full for conciseness), with Q1’s input/output attributes attached. The bold nodes and arrows highlight the functions required to solve 

Q2, and the input/output attributes of this question. The path connecting the input/output attributes of 

Q2 covers the knowledge required to solve it. 

2.4 RQ4: How to Enable Efficient Retrieval? 

We introduce semantic input/output (I/O) tags to explicitly represent the I/O entities of a question, mapping to I/O nodes of paths in the graph. Semantic I/O tags represent semantic elements involved in the analysis, including data entities (e.g., merchant), attributes (e.g., account type), and target-derived quantities (e.g., average fee, applica-ble IDs). Semantic I/O nodes are inserted into the depen-dency graph as explicit input and output entities, serving as semantic anchors that guide retrieval and define valid reasoning paths over the graph. 

3 Approach 

We propose Structure-Grounded Knowledge Re-trieval (SGKR), a retrieval framework for domain-specific data analysis. The overall pipeline con-sists of two stages: (1) offline graph construction ,where we build a structure-grounded graph with code and associated knowledge, and (2) online re-trieval , where we perform a breadth-first search (BFS) on the graph to identify dependency paths between semantic input and output nodes and re-trieve the knowledge-code nodes along those paths. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Given a natural language question q, the goal is to retrieve a subset of nodes S ⊆ VKC whose associated code and knowledge provide the most useful context for a downstream language model to solve the task. Conceptually, the retrieval target is to select a node set S that maximizes the task performance of the model: 

S∗ = arg max 

S⊆VKC 

Acc (q, S ), (1) where Acc (q, S ) denotes the task performance achieved when answering question q using the re-trieved knowledge-code nodes in S as context. 3function attribute 

> function-call dependency graph
> attach knowledge to corresponding functions
> extract I/O tags

offline phase 

online phase        

> knowledge
> AST parser semantic graph builder merge nodes and insert I/O nodes
> input tag1 input tag 2
> output tag1 output tag1 output tag1
> input tag1 tag2
> example question
> Structure-Grounded Knowledge Graph new question extract I/O tags
> subgraph
> compute all possible paths
> ensemble knowledge and functions
> LLMs or agents
> example code
> node
> {"ID": "...", "knowledge": "...", "function": "..."}

Figure 2: Framework of SGKR. Framework of the structure-grounded code retrieval system. In the offline phase, code is parsed via AST to build a semantic graph and a function-call dependency graph, while external knowledge is inserted into relevant functions as comments. Extracted sementic input–output (I/O) tags are added as nodes to augment the graph. At inference time, I/O tags from a query guide the retrieval of relevant subgraphs through dependency paths, and the retrieved functions and knowledge are provided to LLMs for reasoning. 

3.2 Structure-Grounded Knowledge Graph Construction 

In the offline stage, we construct a graph to orga-nize domain knowledge by extracting function-call relationships from example code snippets. 

Data Preparation and Knowledge Attachment 

To ground domain knowledge into the code depen-dency graph, we represent each node using three components: a node identifier, the function code, and the associated knowledge. When a function does not require explicit domain knowledge, we instead attach a brief description of its functional-ity. In this way, each node encodes both executable logic and the semantic information needed to inter-pret its role in task solving. 

Dependency Extraction via Function Calls To extract dependency relations between functions, we first parse the source code into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and collect all function definitions. For each function, we traverse its AST to identify func-tion call expressions and establish directed edges from the calling function to the called function, thereby capturing all function dependencies in the code. 

Identical Nodes Merging and Semantic I/O Node Insertion The parser described in Sec-tion 3.2 may produce multiple nodes that corre-spond to the same function, since the same function can appear in different isolated execution traces. To obtain a consistent graph structure, we first merge such duplicate nodes. Specifically, nodes with the same function name are replaced with a single canonical node, and all incoming and out-going edges of the duplicate nodes are redirected to this node. This ensures that each function is represented uniquely in the graph while preserving all dependency relations. After merging identical function nodes, we insert the extracted semantic I/O nodes and connect them to the corresponding function nodes according to the parsed dependencies. This allows the graph to capture potential relations between different inputs and outputs that share the same functions. For ex-ample, suppose the parsed dependencies contain the paths input 1 → func 1 → output 1 and input 2

→ func 1 → output 2. After merging duplicate in-stances of func 1, the graph can additionally expose the potential structural connection input 1 → func 1

→ output 2.The overall procedure is summarized in Algo-4Algorithm 1 Identical Node Merging and I/O Node Insertion 

Require: Dependency graph G = ( V, E ), I/O nodes VI/O 

Ensure: Updated graph G′ = (V ′, E ′) with unique function nodes and VI/O inserted  

> 1:

G′ ← G 

> 2:

Group identical nodes in V ′ 

> 3:

for each group S = {v1, v 2, ..., v k} represent-ing the same function do  

> 4:

Select one node vc as the canonical node  

> 5:

for each duplicate node vi ∈ S \ { vc} do  

> 6:

Redirect incoming edges: (u, v i) →

(u, v c) 

> 7:

Redirect outgoing edges: (vi, w ) →

(vc, w ) 

> 8:

Remove vi from V ′ 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

for each I/O node v ∈ VI/O do  

> 12:

Add v to V ′ 

> 13:

if v is an input node then  

> 14:

Find the first function node f that con-sumes v 

> 15:

Add edge (v, f ) 

> 16:

else if v is an output node then  

> 17:

Find the function node f that returns v 

> 18:

Add edge (f, v ) 

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

return G′ = ( V ′, E ′)

rithm 1. We further analyze the effect of this merg-ing strategy in the ablation study in Section 4.5. 

3.3 Retrieval via BFS graph search 

Given a new question, we perform graph-based retrieval to identify relevant knowledge and corre-sponding functions. 

Semantic I/O Tag Extraction As discussed in Section 3.2, retrieval begins by matching the ques-tion to semantic I/O nodes in the graph. For each new question, we extract semantic input/output (I/O) tags using keyword matching, and use these tags to identify the corresponding semantic I/O nodes in the knowledge–code dependency graph. If no tags can be identified, the system falls back to the vanilla inference pipeline without retrieval. 

Subgraph Retrieval Given the identified seman-tic I/O nodes, we retrieve a task-relevant subgraph from the full structure-grounded knowledge–code graph. Starting from the input nodes, we perform breadth-first search (BFS) to identify dependency paths that connect them to the output nodes. During traversal, neighboring nodes are expanded while the current search paths are tracked. Whenever the search reaches an output node, the corresponding path is recorded as a dependency chain linking the input concepts to the desired outputs. The union of nodes appearing on the discovered paths forms the retrieved subgraph. Empirically, the BFS re-turns only a small number of dependency paths for each query, which keeps the retrieved subgraph compact. 

Context Construction from Retrieved Subgraph 

Finally, we traverse the retrieved subgraph obtained from steps in Section 3.3 and assemble the context provided to the language model. We ignore seman-tic I/O nodes and extract the associated information from the remaining knowledge-code nodes. Specif-ically, the knowledge fields are concatenated to form the textual context, while the function fields are collected as executable code examples. The re-sulting context combines domain knowledge with executable function implementations derived from the retrieved subgraph, which is supplied to the language model to support downstream reasoning. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate SGKR on two domain-specific bench-marks that require multi-step reasoning and code-based problem solving. 1. DAB STEP (Egg et al., 2025) is a benchmark for realistic multi-step data analysis tasks. It contains over 450 real-world challenges that require models to perform code-based data processing and contextual reasoning over het-erogeneous documentation. 2. CONV FIN QA (Chen et al., 2022) and FinQA (Chen et al., 2021b) are benchmarks for multi-step numerical reasoning in the financial domain. CONV FIN QA focuses on conversational question answering, while FIN QA consists of standalone questions. Both datasets require models to perform multi-step numerical reasoning over financial tables and associated textual context. 5Method DABstep-hard ConvFinQA-hard FinQA-hard Acc. Avg. Nodes Acc. Avg. Nodes Acc. Avg. Nodes                                           

> vanilla 6.88% –52.00% –47.50% –few-shot 11.64% –63.00% –57.78% –
> BGE -LARGE -EN -V1.5-RAG 10.58% 571.33% 263.61% 2GRAPH SAGE-RAG 6.35% 571.67% 262.78% 2CODE BERT-RAG 8.73% 568.33% 261.94% 2SGKR 24.34% 4.65 74.67% 1.52 65.56% 1.50
> Table 1: Accuracy comparison across datasets and average number of retrieved nodes (semantic I/O nodes are not counted).
> Method Acc.
> No Retrieval 6.88% SGKR w/ Fixed Nodes 11.64% SGKR w/o Knowledge 8.73% SGKR w/o Merging 12.43% Full SGKR 24.34%
> Table 2: Ablation study of SGKR. Each variant removes one key component of the proposed framework.

We focus on domain-specific datasets because SGKR retrieves knowledge from a dependency graph constructed from domain code and its asso-ciated semantics. For such retrieval to be meaning-ful, benchmark questions must require reasoning grounded in the same domain knowledge encoded in the graph. In contrast, general programming tasks or open-ended Kaggle-style data science prob-lems are typically less centered around a shared body of domain code and operational knowledge, making them less suitable for evaluating our set-ting. Since our goal is to evaluate multi-step reasoning over code dependencies, we restrict evaluation to 

hard questions in each dataset, defined as instances whose gold solutions require more than one reason-ing/computation step. After filtering, DAB STEP 

remains 378 questions, F IN QA remains 360 ques-tions, and C ONV FIN QA remains 300 questions. 

4.2 Baselines 

We compare SGKR with several representative baselines: 1. Vanilla Prompting : The model answers the question without retrieved context. 2. Few-shot Prompting : The model is provided with a fixed set of demonstration examples in the prompt. 3. DENSE -RAG: Retrieves knowledge–code nodes using bge-large-en-v1.5 (Xiao et al., 2023), a strong general-purpose dense re-triever widely adopted in RAG systems. 4. CODE BERT-RAG: Retrieves nodes using CODE BERT (Feng et al., 2020), a code-pretrained model designed for code under-standing and retrieval. 5. GRAPH SAGE-RAG (Fedorov et al., 2025): Learns node representations with G RAPH -SAGE and retrieves nodes according to their similarity to the query representation. Unlike graph retrieval settings that assume a pre-defined knowledge graph, our setting requires con-structing a knowledge–code dependency graph di-rectly from executable code. To enable a fair com-parison, all retrieval methods operate on the same graph. This design isolates the effect of the retrieval strategy itself, rather than mixing it with variances in knowledge-source construction or graph build-ing. We note that knowledge-source construction is an important design choice in its own right; our goal here is to compare retrieval strategies using under a shared graph structure. 

4.3 Experimental Preparation and Settings 

Since SGKR retrieves a variable number of nodes depending on the discovered subgraph, we set the baseline retrieval budget to match its average re-trieved context size on each dataset, enabling com-parison under similar context budgets. This yields a top-5 setting on DABStep and a top-2 setting on ConvFinQA and FinQA. For F IN QA and C ONV FIN QA, we convert the numerical computation symbols in the original annotations into Python functions. Since these datasets provide annotated computation programs together with relevant financial domain knowledge, we directly attach the corresponding domain knowl-edge to each computation function when construct-ing the graph. 6knowledge & function Ground Truth SGKR GRAPH SAGE-RAG CODE BERT-RAG DENSE -RAG                                  

> rule_applies needed ✓✓✓
> find_all_mccs needed ✓
> sum_fee needed ✓
> most_expensive needed ✓✓✓
> compute_fee needed ✓✓
> average_fee unneeded ✓✓✓
> output_average_fee unneeded ✓
> merchant_matches_fee unneeded ✓
> match_fee_conditions unneeded ✓✓
> match_capture_delay unneeded ✓
> cheapest_card_scheme unneeded ✓
> get_mcc_code_from_dsp unneeded ✓
> Table 3: Retrieved knowledge-code nodes by different methods. ✓means the knowledge is selected by the method.

For DABS TEP , only a limited number of exam-ples are publicly released, and they do not include complete solution processes. We therefore use an LLM ( GPT-5.2 ) to generate step-by-step code solu-tions, while incorporating relevant domain knowl-edge from the benchmark’s provided documenta-tion into the corresponding functions. These gen-erated solutions are then validated through code execution to ensure correctness before being used for graph construction. For DABstep, we adopt the ReAct agent work-flow built upon smolagents , as implemented in the official benchmark repository. 1

4.4 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the performance of different re-trieval strategies on the hard subsets of DAB STEP ,CONV FIN QA, and F IN QA. We also report the av-erage number of retrieved nodes. Overall, SGKR consistently achieves the best performance across all three datasets. On DAB STEP -hard, SGKR im-proves accuracy to 24.34%, substantially outper-forming all baselines. This result highlights both the difficulty of the benchmark and the value of structure-grounded retrieval in complex multi-step data analysis tasks. On ConvFinQA-hard and FinQA-hard, SGKR also consistently outperforms all baselines, while retrieving approximately 25% fewer nodes on aver-age than other embedding-based retrieval methods. Taken together, these results support our intu-ition that code dependency structure provides a stronger retrieval signal than surface-level similar-ity for domain-specific multi-step reasoning tasks. As a result, the proposed Structure-Grounded re-

> 1https://huggingface.co/spaces/adyen/DABstep/ tree/main/baseline

trieval mechanism more effectively identifies task-relevant knowledge, leading to higher accuracy with a more compact retrieved context. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

To understand the contribution of each component in SGKR, we conduct an ablation study by progres-sively removing key modules from the full system. 

No Retrieval. In this setting, the model solves the task without accessing the code graph or retriev-ing any external knowledge. As shown in Table 2, performance drops significantly to 6.88%, indicat-ing that external structured knowledge is crucial for solving complex reasoning tasks. 

SGKR with Fixed Nodes. Instead of dynami-cally constructing a query-specific subgraph and retrieving relevant knowledge and functions from graph nodes, we use a static set of frequently used nodes. This configuration achieves 11.64% accu-racy, substantially lower than the full system, high-lighting the importance of question-specific sub-graph retrieval. 

SGKR without Knowledge. To isolate the con-tribution of structured knowledge beyond function code alone, we remove the knowledge attached to retrieved nodes while retaining the corresponding functions in the retrieved subgraph. The resulting performance degradation indicates that structured knowledge, in addition to code-level dependency information, is critical to SGKR. 

SGKR without Merging Identical Nodes. As discussed in Section 3.2, the AST parser may in-troduce duplicate nodes when the same function appears in different isolated execution traces. With-out merging such nodes, SGKR may retrieve re-7dundant copies of the same function and its as-sociated knowledge. Likewise, similarity-based retrieval methods may repeatedly select duplicate nodes with high similarity scores, leading to redun-dant and less informative retrieval results. 

Full SGKR The full system integrates structure-grounded graph retrieval, dynamic semantic I/O node insertion, and executable code demonstra-tions. This configuration achieves the best perfor-mance, reaching 24.34% accuracy. The result con-firms that structure-grounded retrieval over code de-pendency structure is important for effective multi-step reasoning. 

4.6 Case Study 

We present a case study on the question: “What is the most expensive MCC for a transaction of 5 euros, in general?” from DABS TEP , for which only only SGKR produces the correct solution. Table 3 shows the code snippets retrieved by differ-ent methods against the ground truth computation pipeline. Baseline retrieval methods are often misled by lexical similarity in function names or attributes. For example, merchant_matches_fee() appears highly relevant because the question mentions both 

merchant category codes (MCC) and fee . How-ever, this function is actually designed to filter fees for specific merchants and depends on ad-ditional attributes beyond MCC , making it irrel-evant to the required reasoning chain. Similarly, 

cheapest_card_scheme() is retrieved due to the semantic similarity between cheapest and most ex-pensive , even though card scheme is not used in the fee-rule filtering logic needed for this task. In contrast, SGKR retrieves the functions that form the actual computation pipeline, including rule matching, MCC enumeration, and fee com-putation. This example illustrates that retrieval based purely on semantic similarity can be dis-tracted by superficially related identifiers, whereas structure-grounded retrieval can better recover the task-critical domain knowledge required for correct reasoning. 

5 Related Work 

LLMs for Code Generation in Data Analysis. 

Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong capability in generating executable code for solving complex reasoning and data analysis tasks (Tang et al., 2025; Pérez et al., 2025; Hong et al., 2025). These tasks often require combining domain knowl-edge with correct sequences of computational oper-ations. Recent work has demonstrated that LLMs can translate natural language queries into exe-cutable programs for tasks such as data analysis, data management and database querying (Jing et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025). However, LLMs of-ten struggle to select the knowledge required to solve a new problem, especially when the relevant knowledge is not lexically similar to the new ques-tion (Agarwal et al., 2026). 

Graph-Based Retrieval. Recent work explores graph-based retrieval to better capture structured relationships in knowledge (Liang et al., 2026; Saleh et al., 2024). Instead of retrieving documents based solely on embedding similarity, these ap-proaches organize knowledge into graphs and per-form multi-hop retrieval over the graph structure. Such methods have been applied to knowledge-intensive tasks such as multi-hop question answer-ing (Han et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2018; Shavaki et al., 2024), where reasoning requires connecting multiple pieces of information. In contrast, our work focuses on the generation of data analysis code, where the key challenge is identifying the relevant knowledge and the sequence of computa-tional operations required to transform inputs into outputs. 

Graph-Based Program Representation Prior work represents programs as graphs, such as ab-stract syntax trees (Allamanis et al., 2018), data-flow graphs (Guo et al., 2021; Cummins et al., 2021), and code property graphs, to capture struc-tural relationships between program components. These representations are primarily developed for program analysis and code searching tasks (Ye et al., 2020). In contrast, our work leverages pro-gram structure as a carrier of knowledge, construct-ing a dependency graph that supports knowledge retrieval for data analysis code generation. 

6 Conclusion 

We propose Structure-Grounded Knowledge Re-trieval (SGKR), a structured-grounded framework to retrieve knowledge from previous code snip-pets. Instead of relying on embedding similar-ity, SGKR leverages function-call relationships to identify knowledge that forms executable rea-soning paths. By representing domain knowl-edge as a code dependency graph and retrieving dependency-consistent subgraphs, SGKR provides 8structured grounding for LLM-based code genera-tion. Experiments on multiple multi-step data anal-ysis benchmarks demonstrate that SGKR consis-tently improves solution correctness compared to embedding-based retrieval for both vanilla LLMs and coding agents. 9Limitations and Future Directions 

Despite its effectiveness, SGKR has several limita-tions. First, our approach assumes the availability of executable example code and associated domain knowledge that can be organized into a dependency graph. Constructing such resources may require additional effort when adapting the system to new domains. Moreover, SGKR is most effective for tasks that rely on domain knowledge and reusable computational patterns, and may provide limited benefits for code-generation tasks that do not re-quire external knowledge. Second, the current implementation relies on a semantic parser that extracts dependencies from compilable code. For datasets such as FinQA and ConvFinQA, where solutions consist of symbolic numerical expressions rather than executable code, we must convert these expressions into Python func-tion calls. This additional wrapping step may intro-duce engineering overhead and could limit direct applicability to tasks where reasoning steps are not naturally expressed as executable programs. For future work, we plan to explore automatic generation of such example programs and associ-ated knowledge using large language models. For instance, a pre-play or simulation stage could gener-ate candidate reasoning programs before inference, which can then be incorporated into the dependency graph to expand coverage. This direction could re-duce the need for manually curated examples and improve the scalability of the proposed framework across domains. 

Ethical Considerations 

Risk of over-trusting LLM outputs. While SKGR provides structured grounding through code dependencies, the generated reasoning and code may still be incorrect. The explicit dependency structure and executable form can create a false sense of reliability, leading users to over-trust the outputs. This risk is particularly important in high-stakes domains such as healthcare. Users should treat generated results as assistive rather than au-thoritative and incorporate validation or human oversight when necessary. 

Use of AI assistants. AI assistants were used in the development of this work to support code generation, writing, and editing. All outputs were reviewed, validated, and refined by the authors to ensure correctness and clarity. The final content reflects the authors’ own understanding and contri-butions. 

References 

Shubham Agarwal, Asim Biswal, Sepanta Zeighami, Alvin Cheung, Joseph Gonzalez, and Aditya G Parameswaran. 2026. Arming data agents with tribal knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13521 .Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Mah-moud Khademi. 2018. Learning to represent pro-grams with graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Lilian Weng, and Aleksander M ˛ adry. 2024. Mle-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021a. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, and William Yang Wang. 2021b. FinQA: A dataset of numerical reasoning over financial data. In Proceed-ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3697–3711. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhiyu Chen, SHIYANG LI, Charese Smiley, Zhiqiang Ma, Sameena Shah, and William Yang Wang. 2022. Convfinqa: Exploring the chain of numerical reason-ing in conversational finance question answering. In 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing .Chris Cummins, Zacharias V Fisches, Tal Ben-Nun, Torsten Hoefler, Michael FP O’Boyle, and Hugh Leather. 2021. Programl: A graph-based program representation for data flow analysis and compiler op-timizations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2244–2253. PMLR. Alex Egg, Martin Iglesias Goyanes, Friso Kingma, An-dreu Mora, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2025. Dabstep: Data agent benchmark for multi-step reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2506.23719. Konstantin Fedorov, Boris Zarubin, and Vladimir Ivanov. 2025. Gracg: Graph retrieval augmented code generation. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM Interna-tional Conference on Automated Software Engineer-ing Workshops (ASEW) , pages 291–298. 

10 Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xi-aocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Code-bert: A pre-trained model for programming and natu-ral languages. ArXiv , abs/2002.08155. Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie LIU, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, and 1 others. 2021. Graphcodebert: Pre-training code representations with data flow. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Haoyu Han, Yu Wang, Harry Shomer, Kai Guo, Ji-ayuan Ding, Yongjia Lei, Mahantesh Halappanavar, Ryan A. Rossi, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Xianfeng Tang, Qi He, Zhigang Hua, Bo Long, Tong Zhao, Neil Shah, Amin Javari, Yinglong Xia, and Jiliang Tang. 2025. Retrieval-augmented generation with graphs (graphrag). Preprint , arXiv:2501.00309. Sirui Hong, Yizhang Lin, Bang Liu, Bangbang Liu, Bin-hao Wu, Ceyao Zhang, Danyang Li, Jiaqi Chen, Jiayi Zhang, Jinlin Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Data inter-preter: An llm agent for data science. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 19796–19821. Xueyu Hu, Ziyu Zhao, Shuang Wei, Ziwei Chai, Qianli Ma, Guoyin Wang, Xuwu Wang, Jing Su, Jingjing Xu, Ming Zhu, and 1 others. 2024. Infiagent-dabench: Evaluating agents on data analysis tasks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05507 .Yiming Huang, Jianwen Luo, Yan Yu, Yitong Zhang, Fangyu Lei, Yifan Wei, Shizhu He, Lifu Huang, Xiao Liu, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. 2024. DA-code: Agent data science code generation benchmark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 13487–13521. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Jie Jiang, Siqi Shen, Haining Xie, Yang Li, Yu Shen, Danqing Huang, Bo Qian, Yinjun Wu, Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui, and Peng Chen. 2025. Sqlgovernor: An llm-powered sql toolkit for real world application. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.08575. Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wen-lin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. 2024. Dsbench: How far are data science agents from becoming data science experts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703 .Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781. Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen-tau Yih, Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. 2023. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for data science code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 18319–18345. PMLR. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, and 1 others. 2023. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:42330–42357. Junli Liang, Pengfei Zhou, Wangqiu Zhou, Wenjie Qing, Qi Zhao, Ziwen Wang, Qi Song, and Xiangyang Li. 2026. Sentgraph: Hierarchical sentence graph for multi-hop retrieval-augmented question answering. 

Preprint , arXiv:2601.03014. Costas Mavromatis and George Karypis. 2024. Gnn-rag: Graph neural retrieval for large language model reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2405.20139. Alberto Sánchez Pérez, Alaa Boukhary, Paolo Papotti, Luis Castejón Lozano, and Adam Elwood. 2025. An llm-based approach for insight generation in data analysis. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 562–582. Saharshaa Rani, S G Deepika, D Devdharshini, and Harini Ravindran. 2024. Augmenting code sequenc-ing with retrieval-augmented generation (rag) for context-aware code synthesis. 2024 First Interna-tional Conference on Software, Systems and Informa-tion Technology (SSITCON) , pages 1–7. Stephen E. Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. 1994. Okapi at trec-3. In Text Retrieval Conference .Ahmmad OM Saleh, Gokhan Tur, and Yucel Saygin. 2024. Sg-rag: Multi-hop question answering with large language models through knowledge graphs. In 

Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Natural Language and Speech Processing (ICNLSP 2024) , pages 439–448. Mahdi Amiri Shavaki, Pouria Omrani, Ramin Toosi, and Mohammad Ali Akhaee. 2024. Knowledge graph based retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop question answering enhancement. In 2024 15th Inter-national Conference on Information and Knowledge Technology (IKT) , pages 78–84. IEEE. Zirui Tang, Weizheng Wang, Zihang Zhou, Yang Jiao, Bangrui Xu, Boyu Niu, Dayou Zhou, Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, Yeye He, and 1 others. 2025. Llm/agent-as-data-analyst: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23988 .Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, and Niklas Muennighoff. 2023. C-pack: Packaged resources to advance general chinese embedding. Preprint ,arXiv:2309.07597. 

11 Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul N Bennett, Junaid Ahmed, and Arnold Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-pher D Manning. 2018. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empiri-cal methods in natural language processing , pages 2369–2380. Guixin Ye, Zhanyong Tang, Huanting Wang, Dingyi Fang, Jianbin Fang, Songfang Huang, and Zheng Wang. 2020. Deep program structure modeling through multi-relational graph-based learning. In 

> Proceedings of the ACM International conference on parallel architectures and compilation techniques ,pages 111–123.

A Appendix 

A.1 Prompts for DAB STEP 

Prompt of DABS TEP Evaluation 

System Prompt 

You are an expert data analyst who can solve any task using code blobs. You will be given a task to solve as best as you can. In the en-vironment there exists data which will help you solve your data analyst task. This data is spread out across files in the directory 

{ctx_path} .For each task you will follow a hierarchy of workflows: a root-level task workflow and a leaf-level step workflow. There is one root-level workflow per task which consists of multiple leaf-level step workflows. 

Root Task Workflow: 

Explore → Plan → Execute → Conclude 

1. Explore: Perform data exploration in the directory {ctx_path} and under-stand what data is available and its lim-itations. 2. Plan: Draft a high-level plan based on the results of the Explore step. 3. Execute: Execute the drafted plan. If the plan fails, restart from the Explore step. 4. Conclude: Based on the executed plan, summarize the findings into an answer for the task. 

Step Workflow: Thought → Code → Ob-servation 

1. Thought: Explain your reasoning and the code you will use. 2. Code: Write Python code in the fol-lowing format: 

Code: 

``` py your_python_code <end_code> 

Use print() to retain important out-puts. 3. Observation: Review the printed out-puts before continuing. 

Rules 

• Always check the directory ctx_path 

for relevant documentation or data be-fore assuming information is unavail-able. • Validate assumptions using the avail-able documentation before executing code. • If all possible solution plans fail, output “Not Applicable” as the final answer. • Use only defined variables and valid Python statements. • Avoid long unpredictable code snippets in a single step. • Use Python only when necessary and avoid repeating code that previously failed. • Do not create notional variables. • Imports and variables persist between executions. • Solve the task directly instead of giving instructions. • Allowed imports: 

authorized_imports .

12 • Never import final_answer ; it is al-ready available. 

Available Tool 

{final_answer()} 

Example: 

answer = df["result"].mean() final\_answer(answer) <end\_code> 

Task Instruction 

{question} 

You must follow these guidelines when pro-ducing your final answer: 

{guidelines} 

Context and Hints 

Following domain knowledge and context should be helpful: 

{retrieved_knowledge} 

Here are some example functions that you may refer to: 

{retrieved_functions} 

A.2 Prompts for ConvFinQA and FinQA 

Prompt for C ONV FIN QA and F IN QA Eval-uation 

You are an expert in financial reasoning. 

Output Requirement 

Return ONLY the program tokens as a JSON list, ending with "EOF" .Format: 

["operation(", "val1", "val2", ")", "EOF"] 

Multi-step Calculation Rules 

• Write operations sequentially (not nested). • Use #0, #1, #2, etc. to reference previ-ous results. • #0 = result of first operation, #1 = result of second operation. 

Token Format Rules 

• Each token must be a separate string in the JSON list. • Numbers must appear as plain numbers (e.g., "123" ). 

• Operations must end with parentheses: 

"add(" , "subtract(" , "multiply(" ,

"divide(" , "greater(" .• Closing parentheses must be separate tokens: ")" .• Always end with "EOF" .• For percentages, do not convert dec-imals to percent format (e.g., use 

"0.123" for 12.3%). • For constants, use predefined tokens (e.g., const_100 ). 

Supported Operations 

Basic math • add(val1, val2) • subtract(val1, val2) • multiply(val1, val2) • divide(val1, val2) Comparison • greater(val1, val2) — returns 1 if val1 

> val2, else 0 

Constants 

• const_2, const_10, const_100000 • const_m1 

Examples 

Single-step: ["divide(", "8.1", "56.0", ")", "EOF"] Multi-step: ["subtract(", "153.7", "139.9", ")", "divide(", "#0", "139.9", ")", "EOF"] With constants: ["multiply(", "#1", "const_100", ")", "EOF"] 

Context and Hints 

Following domain knowledge and context should be helpful: 

{retrieved_knowledge} 

Here are some example functions that you may refer to: 

{retrieved_functions} 

13