Title: CBCL: Safe Self-Extending Agent Communication

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14512v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:20:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# CBCL: Safe Self-Extending Agent Communication 

Hugo O’Connor 

Anuna Research hugo@anuna.io  

> ©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

Abstract —Agent communication languages (ACLs) enable heterogeneous agents to share knowledge and co-ordinate across diverse domains. This diversity demands extensibility, but expressive extension mechanisms can push the input language beyond the complexity classes where full validation is tractable. We present CBCL (Common Business Communication Language), an agent communication language that constrains all messages, including runtime language extensions, to the determin-istic context-free language (DCFL) class. CBCL allows agents to define, transmit, and adopt domain-specific “dialect” extensions as first-class messages; three safety invariants (R1–R3), machine-checked in Lean 4 and enforced in a Rust reference implementation, prevent unbounded expansion, applying declared resource limits, and preserving core vocabulary. We formalize the language and its safety properties in Lean 4, implement a reference parser and dialect engine in Rust with property-based and differential tests, and extract a verified parser binary. Our results demonstrate that homoiconic protocol design, where extension definitions share the same representation as ordinary messages, can be made provably safe. As autonomous agents in-creasingly extend their own communication capabilities, formally bounding what they can express to each other is a precondition for oversight. 

Index Terms —language-theoretic security, agent com-munication, multiagent systems, deterministic context-free languages, formal verification, protocol security 

I. Introduction 

Autonomous software agents increasingly coordinate through message-passing protocols to perform complex tasks: managing supply chains, orchestrating IoT device swarms, and mediating human–AI collaboration. The correctness and security of these systems depend critically on how agents parse and interpret the messages they exchange. Language-theoretic security (LangSec), as articulated by Sassaman, Patterson, Bratus, and Locasto in Security applications of formal language theory [1], shows that the computational complexity class of an input language determines the difficulty of validation and the attack surface that parser implementations exhibit. Languages above the deterministic context-free class introduce ambiguity that makes parser equivalence undecidable [1], while Turing-complete inputs make validation itself undecidable; in both 

> Accepted at the LangSec Workshop, 2026 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW).

cases, ad-hoc validation cannot reliably prevent the emer-gence of “weird machines” [2], unintended computational artifacts that attackers exploit to achieve behavior beyond a system’s intended functionality. Contemporary agent communication presents a partic-ularly acute instance of this problem. Early ACLs such as KQML [3] and FIPA-ACL [6] defined core vocabularies of communicative acts (“performatives”). These languages are parseable and well-defined; KQML explicitly allowed communities to define new performatives by agreement, but without formal constraints on such extensions. In practice, extensibility was largely pushed into content languages and ontologies. Surveys of ACLs identify persis-tent interoperability failures. Heterogeneous agents remain confined to rigid contexts, and ad-hoc extensions proliferate incompatible dialects that are difficult to generalize without the original developers [4], [5]. In the terminology of Zambonelli et al. [20], traditional ACLs support only self-adaptation (parameter tuning within a fixed structure), not self-expression (structural evolution of the system itself). The modern alternative, using natural language or unrestricted JSON schemas as the communication substrate (as in MCP [7] and LLM-based agent frameworks), provides unlimited extensibility but creates an input language whose computational complexity is effectively unbounded. Deter-mining whether an arbitrary natural language message will cause harmful behavior requires solving undecidable problems. This paper presents CBCL, a language designed to be expressive, extensible, and tractable. CBCL provides a minimal core vocabulary (8 performatives) and a formal mechanism for agents to define, exchange, and adopt new domain-specific vocabularies (“dialects”) at runtime, without centralized coordination and without escaping the DCFL complexity class. CBCL achieves this through ho-moiconic self-extension . Dialect definitions are themselves valid CBCL messages expressed in S-expression syntax, so they can be transmitted, verified, and installed using the same parsing machinery used for ordinary communication. Three safety constraints, verified both in a Lean 4 formal-ization and enforced in a Rust reference implementation, ensure that this self-extension is provably safe:  

> •

R1 (No Recursion): Dialect templates are purely declarative pattern-template substitutions. Direct and mutual recursion are forbidden (no cyclic dependencies between performative templates). No iteration or 

> arXiv:2604.14512v1 [cs.CR] 16 Apr 2026

reflection is permitted.  

> •

R2 (Resource Bounds): Every dialect declares static resource limits (nesting depth ≤ 64 , expansion size ≤ 8192 characters, verification time ≤ 1000 ms) enforced at both installation and runtime.  

> •

R3 (Core Preservation): The eight core performa-tives cannot be redefined by any dialect, preserving protocol bootstrap invariants. Together, these constraints support DCFL preservation ,meaning that the language recognized by a CBCL parser remains in DCFL regardless of how many dialects are installed. We give a formal argument in Section IV-G ;the full closure proof is mechanized in Lean 4 (theorem 

dcfl_preserved ). CBCL is named after McCarthy’s 1982 proposal for a “Common Business Communication Language” [9] that would be “open ended so that as programs improve, programs that can at first only order by stock numbers can later be programmed to inquire about specifications and prices. . . ” Our work aspires to this vision while providing formal security guarantees. 

Contributions. (1) A protocol design methodology that achieves runtime self-extension while preserving DCFL membership, applicable to message-passing systems where DCFL expressiveness is acceptable. (2) A Lean 4 formal-ization covering parser correctness (soundness and com-pleteness), safety constraint verification (R1–R3), pipeline totality for parse/validate/verify, and DCFL preservation under dialect installation. (3) A Rust reference implementa-tion ( cbcl-rs ) with dialect verification, gossip propagation, C FFI/WASM bindings, and fuzz targets; a verified parser binary extracted from the Lean proofs. (4) A draft IETF Internet-Draft specifying application/cbcl [10], with a proof-of-concept Nostr [30] transport binding ( cbcl-nostr )for agent communication and Lightning Network micropay-ments over decentralized relays. 

II. Background and Threat Model 

A. The Unbounded Attack Surface Problem 

Modern agent communication protocols have moved up 

the Chomsky hierarchy [29], from the well-defined gram-mars of KQML and FIPA-ACL to unbounded complexity, without acknowledging the security consequences implied by formal language theory [1], [2] (Table I). The threat model for CBCL assumes agents operating in open Byzantine environments where: (1) untrusted peers may send maliciously crafted messages designed to exploit parser differentials, trigger resource exhaustion, or inject unintended computation; (2) dialect definitions 

arrive from potentially adversarial sources and constitute executable extensions to the receiver’s behavior; and (3) no central authority controls participant conduct or vocabulary evolution. The security goal is to ensure that no message, including dialect definitions, can cause a conformant parser to enter an unanticipated state or perform unexpected computation .

> TABLE I
> Agent communication protocols classified by input language complexity.

Protocol Complexity Ext. Verif. Weird M. 

KQML [3] CFL Partial Partial Stack FIPA-ACL [6] CFL Partial Partial Stack MCP [7] RE Yes No Turing LLM Agents RE Yes No Turing 

CBCL DCFL Yes Yes None †   

> “Complexity” refers to the effective computational power of the end-to-end message interpretation pipeline, not the surface syntax alone. KQML and FIPA-ACL use S-expression envelope syntax (DCFL), but neither specification constrains the content language, so the end-to-end complexity is at least CFL. MCP and LLM agent frameworks can induce Turing-complete behavior when tool invocation permits arbitrary code execution. CFL = context-free language (Type 2); DCFL = deterministic CFL; RE = recursively enumerable (Type 0). Ext. = runtime self-extension of the protocol’s vocabulary; “Partial” indicates informal extensibility without safety guarantees (KQML’s open performative set, FIPA-ACL’s X-parameters). Weird M. = weird machine class [2]. †At the parser and template-expander layer; tool backends and agent action semantics are outside CBCL’s scope.

B. Why DCFL Is the Right Complexity Class 

The choice of DCFL (rather than regular, general CFG, or context-sensitive) is deliberate:  

> •

Regular languages cannot express the nested struc-ture of agent messages (envelopes wrapping messages, dialects scoping inner messages).  

> •

General CFL risks parser differentials: ambiguous grammars admit multiple parse trees, and attackers can exploit divergent interpretations [1], [16]. Every DCFL has an unambiguous grammar, making unambi-guity a class-level property rather than a per-grammar proof obligation [13]. Parser equivalence is therefore preserved automatically under language evolution.  

> •

DCFL is the minimal class supporting nested struc-ture with parser equivalence . Residual divergence from serialization or encoding is mitigated through canonical serialization (Section V-E).  

> •

Context-sensitive and beyond. Context-sensitive membership is PSPACE-complete [13]; Type 0 is undecidable. Both exceed the recognizer complexity that LangSec considers tractable for full input valida-tion [1]. S-expression syntax is a natural fit: the grammar is LR(1)-parseable (indeed LL(1)) and nested parenthesized lists directly mirror the pushdown automaton’s stack operations. 

III. CBCL Language Design 

We use the following terminology throughout. A per-formative is a named message type (e.g., tell , ask ). A 

dialect is a named, versioned collection of performative definitions that extends CBCL’s core vocabulary. Each dialect performative has a template : the pattern-template substitution rule that maps dialect invocations to core CBCL messages. 

A. Core Grammar 

CBCL messages are S-expressions conforming to an ABNF grammar (fully specified in the IETF draft [10]). The top-level rules are:        

> cbcl-message = simple-message / meta-message / lang-message / wrapped-message simple-message = "(" performative SP recipient [SP content] *(SP parameter) ")" SP = " " ; single ASCII space (0x20) performative = "tell" / "ask" / "reply" / "hello" / "bye" / "ok" / "error" / "cancel" lang-message = "(" "lang" SP dialect-name SP cbcl-message ")" s-expr = "(" *( s-expr / atom ) ")" atom = identifier / string / number / boolean / symbol

The four message categories are: 

Simple messages use one of eight core performatives:   

> (tell @bob "The meeting is at 3pm") (ask @alice "Status of task-42?" :thread conv-17) (reply @alice "75% complete" :in-reply-to msg-9874) (ok @bob) (error @sender "parse failure") (hello @bob) (bye @bob)

Colon-prefixed identifiers such as :thread and 

:in-reply-to are keyword parameters : named optional arguments in the style of Common Lisp keyword symbols. They are syntactically atoms (the symbol production in the grammar) and carry no special semantics beyond serving as self-quoting parameter labels. 

Meta messages operate on dialects—defining, querying, and teaching: 

> (meta (define logistics (cbcl) @consortium (:resource-requirements ((max-depth 16) (max-expansion-size 4096) (verification-time 1000))) (extend track-shipment (pkg-id &key route priority) (tell @tracking-svc (shipment-request :package pkg-id :route route :priority (or priority "normal")) :domain logistics)) (:examples (track-shipment "PKG-42" :route "A->B") (tell @tracking-svc (shipment-request :package "PKG-42" :route "A->B" :priority "normal") :domain logistics))))

The optional :examples clause carries semantic meaning: each input/output pair illustrates what the dialect author 

intends a performative to do in a concrete scenario. Because CBCL cannot formally constrain meaning (Section VII-D ), examples serve as the primary mechanism for communicat-ing intended semantics between agents. A receiving agent can additionally evaluate the examples against its own expander to verify mechanical agreement before claiming dialect support. A query meta message asks a peer whether it supports a dialect; a teach meta message transmits a previously defined dialect to another agent: 

> (meta (query logistics @bob)) (meta (teach logistics @alice <dialect-definition>))

The teach payload is the same S-expression used in define ;the receiving agent parses, verifies (R1–R3), and installs it using its existing CBCL infrastructure. 

Language-scoped messages invoke dialect performatives. Dialect invocations must appear inside a lang wrapper that names the dialect; bare dialect performatives at top level are syntactically invalid. This scoping rule is what makes the DCFL preservation argument (Section IV-G )straightforward: the lang tag serves as a deterministic dispatch token. 

> (lang logistics (track-shipment "PKG-123" :route "A->B"))

This expands via pattern-template substitution to: 

> (tell @tracking-svc (shipment-request :package "PKG-123" :route "A->B" :priority "normal") :domain logistics)

Wrapped messages provide metadata (envelopes), in-tegrity (signatures), and resource governance: 

> (with-limits :timeout 100 :max-depth 10 (ask @reasoner "Compute optimal path"))

B. Homoiconic Self-Extension 

CBCL’s dialect definitions are themselves valid CBCL messages, eliminating the need for a separate meta-language parser (a second attack surface) or out-of-band registry. Inspired by Racket’s #lang mechanism [11], a sin-gle DCFL recognizer handles both ordinary communication and language extension; the DCFL preservation argument (Section IV-G ) explains why installing a dialect does not increase the recognizer’s computational power. 

C. Template Expansion Semantics 

Dialect performatives expand through a deliberately re-stricted template language supporting four forms: (1) literal templates with parameter placeholders, (2) substitution of parameter references with argument values, (3) bounded conditionals (cond ((= param value) template) ...) 

with no recursion, and (4) sequences of template expres-sions. This template language is not Turing-complete . It supports only flat pattern matching, finite conditional branching, and one-shot substitution. Critically, expansion is single-pass : the expanded result is not fed back through the expander. This ensures that template evaluation termi-nates in time linear in the template size plus substituted argument size, and is bounded by declared expansion limits. D. Message Processing Lifecycle 

Figure 1 shows the processing pipeline that every incom-ing message traverses. Steps 1–2 (parse, validate + classify) apply to all messages. The dialect-definition path (steps 3–4) applies only to meta define messages; the expansion path (step 5) applies only to lang invocations. The pipeline is total: every input produces either a well-typed result or a well-typed error (Theorem 12). 

IV. Safety Invariants and Formal Verification 

A. Lean 4 Formalization Overview 

We formalize CBCL in Lean 4 as a library ( LeanCbcl )comprising modules for S-expressions, messages, parsing, se-rialization, pattern matching, dialect parsing, template ex-pansion, deterministic-union reasoning, dialect constraints (R1–R3), and an end-to-end pipeline. The formalization comprises approximately 5,400 lines of Lean across 16 modules and yields 176 machine-checked theorems, with zero sorry gaps and no custom axioms. A verified parser binary ( cbcl-parse ) is extracted from the proofs. 

B. Parser Correctness 

The S-expression parser uses recursive descent with a fuel parameter for termination. The fuel is set to |s| × 4 + 1 ,where |s| is the input length in characters. The multiplier 4 reflects the worst-case fuel consumption per input character: a single character can trigger up to four recursive steps (entering a list, attempting to parse an element, consuming the closing delimiter, and returning the result). The 

+1 ensures termination on empty input. This bound is sufficient for all inputs; the Lean proof of Theorem 1 confirms that parseSExpr never exhausts fuel. The fuel parameter is retained in the extracted cbcl-parse binary. The fuel value is computed at runtime from the input length, so the executable faithfully mirrors the verified model with no gap between proof and implementation. The top-level parser also rejects trailing input and unterminated strings. 

Theorem 1 (Termination). For all inputs s, parseSExpr (s)

terminates and produces either a valid SExpr or a parse error. 

A universal well-formedness theorem ( allSExpr_well-Formed ) additionally proves by structural induction that 

every SExpr value satisfies the inductive WellFormedSExpr 

predicate, ensuring the parser can only produce structurally valid output. In these theorems, e is an SExpr (the S-expression parse tree/AST) and m is a Message (the semantic classification into simple, meta, dialect, or wrapped). The predicate ValidMsgGrammar (e, m ) is an inductive relation encoding which S-expressions constitute valid CBCL mes-sages: it has four constructors corresponding to simple messages (with one of the eight core performatives), meta 

messages, lang -scoped dialect invocations, and wrapped (envelope/signed/with-limits) messages. Because the gram-mar is DCFL, each valid input admits exactly one parse tree, so the Message returned by the parser is unique. 

Theorem 2 (Soundness). If parseMessage (e) = some m,then ValidMsgGrammar (e, m ).

Theorem 3 (Completeness). If ValidMsgGrammar (e, m )

holds, then parseMessage (e) = some m.

Soundness and completeness together establish that the parser recognizes exactly the message grammar encoded in Lean (via ValidMessageGrammar ), no more, no less. This eliminates the possibility of parser differential attacks between the formal specification and the implementation, a core LangSec concern. We additionally verify 10 concrete round-trip properties (parse (serialize (e)) = Ok (e)) covering the seven atom types (symbol, integer, negative integer, boolean true/false, string, keyword), empty lists, flat lists, and nested lists. A 

SafeSymbol predicate formally characterizes which symbol names survive round-tripping (non-empty, no delimiters, not a boolean or integer literal); the general theorem 

roundtrip_safeSymbol proves round-tripping for all safe symbols via char-level parser reasoning. 

C. R1: No Recursion 

Constraint R1 ensures that dialect performative tem-plates contain no direct or mutual recursion, preventing unbounded expansion. The Lean 4 formalization covers both: Theorems 4–5 establish soundness and completeness for self-reference detection (a performative name cannot appear in its own template), while Theorem 7 proves sound-ness of mutual recursion prevention via a transitive-closure dependency predicate ( DependsClosure ) that detects cycles of any length in the performative dependency graph. 

Theorem 4 (R1 Soundness). If containsSelfRef (name , t ) = 

false , then name does not occur anywhere in t.

Theorem 5 (R1 Completeness). If name occurs in t, then 

containsSelfRef (name , t ) = true .

Theorem 6. The base dialect (8 core performatives) is R1-valid. 

Theorem 7 (Mutual Recursion Soundness). If 

verifyR1NoMutualRecursion (δ) = true , then no perfor-mative in δ participates in a dependency cycle. 

The mutual recursion verifier uses a computable DFS-based cycle detector (checkNoCycles ) with full soundness and completeness proofs against a semantic 

mutualRecursion specification: no false negatives and no false positives. The Rust reference implementation mirrors the computable version. 

D. R2: Resource Bounds 

Constraint R2 enforces static resource limits (maxDepth ≤ 64 , maxExpansionSize ≤ 8192 characters, 

verificationTime ≤ 1000 ms). The Lean 4 model uses a fuel parameter: boundedEvalFull decrements a natural-number counter at each expansion step, returning none 1. Parse S-expression    

> 2. Validate + classify
> 3. Verify R1–R3 + signature
> 4. Install dialect
> 5. Expand template under resource ctx
> 6. Deliver to application layer
> Error Error
> Error
> Error
> meta
> simple / wrapped
> lang
> fail fail
> fail
> fail
> Fig. 1. Message processing lifecycle. Steps 1–2 apply to all messages; the upper branch handles dialect definitions ( meta ), the lower branch handles dialect invocations ( lang ), and simple or wrapped messages proceed directly to delivery. Any step may reject with a well-typed error (Theorem 12).

when fuel reaches zero. The Rust implementation mirrors this for depth and size, adding a wall-clock timeout as defense-in-depth. 

Theorem 8 (Bounded Evaluation). boundedEvalFull (fuel , e, rs )

always terminates, producing either a result or none (re-source exhaustion). A depth-bounded invariant additionally rules out depth creep across nested expansions. 

Theorem 9. If verifyR2 (δ) = true , then δ’s declared bounds are within system limits. E. R3: Core Preservation 

Constraint R3 prevents dialects from redefining the eight core performatives. 

Theorem 10 (Core Preservation). If verifyR3 (δ) = true ,then for all core performative names n, δ does not define n.

Theorem 11 (Installation Safety). Installing an R3-verified dialect into a well-formed agent preserves well-formedness. F. Pipeline Totality 

The Lean pipeline from parse → validate → verify constraints (for define /define-dialect meta messages) is formalized as runPipeline : String → PipelineResult .

Theorem 12 (Pipeline Totality). For all inputs s,

runPipeline (s) returns a PipelineResult and never diverges. 

Theorem 13 (Pipeline Soundness). If runPipeline (s) = 

success (m), then s parsed successfully, m satisfies 

ValidMsgGrammar , and m passes validation. If m is a 

define /define-dialect meta message, its dialect defi-nition passes R1–R3. G. DCFL Preservation Argument 

The central security property is that installing dialects does not push the recognized language beyond DCFL. We establish this through three steps: 1) Base case. The core CBCL grammar is LR(1)-parseable (indeed LL(1)), hence DCFL. 2) Extension step. A dialect adds finitely many 

extend clauses that introduce new performative heads. All dialect invocations must appear inside a (lang name ...) wrapper. DCFLs are not closed under union in general [33]; CBCL avoids this because the lang keyword followed by a unique dialect name forms a prefix-free partition: a deterministic pushdown automaton (DPDA) [13] dispatches to the appropriate subgrammar by consuming the lang 

tag and dialect name, with no additional lookahead beyond LR(1) required. R1 and R2 ensure template expansion terminates and is resource-bounded, but do not increase parsing power. 3) Inductive closure. Since each installation preserves DCFL membership, and the base grammar is DCFL, the language remains DCFL after any finite sequence of dialect installations. This argument is fully mechanized in Lean 4. Theorems 2– 3 establish parser correctness, 4–7 verify R1, 8–9 verify R2, and 10–11 verify R3. The deterministic-union construction is proven by agentDetParser_agrees , which shows that the combined DPDA agrees with the boolean decider for agents with unique dialect names ( namesUnique ). The final theorem dcfl_preserved composes these results: installing a fresh R3-verified dialect preserves DCFL membership. TABLE II              

> Reference implementation crates (Rust).
> Crate LOC Responsibility
> cbcl-core 7,800 Agent, evaluator, R1–R3, gossip, canonical
> cbcl-parser 1,900 Recursive-descent S-expr & message parser
> cbcl-cli 430 Parse, verify, agent REPL, gossip simulation
> cbcl-ffi 430 C FFI bindings via cbindgen cbcl-wasm 490 WebAssembly bindings (optional JS interop)

V. Reference Implementation 

A. Architecture 

The reference implementation is written in Rust ( ∼11,000 lines of library code) as a Cargo workspace of five crates (Table II). The core library ( cbcl-core ) forbids unsafe code and uses only alloc , making it suitable for no_std 

environments. An earlier GNU Guile Scheme prototype informed the design but is superseded by the Rust imple-mentation. 

B. Dialect Verification Engine 

Upon receiving a dialect definition, the implementation executes: (1) R1 check : walk each template AST for self-references and reject if found; additionally reject mutual recursion by detecting cycles in the performative dependency graph; (2) R2 check : verify declared bounds are within system limits; (3) R3 check : reject if any extend 

clause redefines a core performative; (4) Integrity check 

(optional): if a cryptographic signer is registered (via a 

Signer trait), verify the signature and content hash. The protocol is algorithm-agnostic; the signature algorithm is identified by the dialect’s metadata, allowing deployments to use Ed25519, ECDSA, or post-quantum schemes without protocol changes. Only after all checks pass is the dialect installed. Verification runs in O(|δ|2) time in the size of the dialect definition. 

C. Runtime Resource Enforcement 

A ResourceContext struct tracks depth, cumulative expansion size, and elapsed wall-clock time during message evaluation. Three checks enforce bounds: enter_depth 

increments the depth counter and returns a resource-limit error if max_depth is exceeded; check_expansion_limit 

accumulates expansion size; and check_time_limit com-pares elapsed time against the timeout. These checks are invoked at each step of template expansion, ensuring that even adversarially crafted templates cannot exceed their declared resource bounds. 

D. Epidemic Dialect Propagation 

Dialects propagate between agents via an epidemic (gossip) protocol. In a fully-connected topology, classic epidemic dissemination analysis [27] yields convergence to full coverage in O( log n) rounds; CBCL builds on this result. With transmission probability p = 0 .8, empirical testing with networks of 10–500 agents matches the O( log n) bound;                           

> TABLE III
> Lean 4 verification coverage.
> Component Thm. Approach
> S-Expression types 2Structural induction Parser 26 Fuel-based, well-formedness Serializer 51 Round-trip, SafeSymbol
> Message parser 9Soundness + completeness R1 (no recursion) 13 DFS sound. + complete. R2 (resource bounds) 6Depth-bounded evaluation R3 (core preservation) 4Redefinition check Pipeline 6Totality + composition DCFL preservation 50 Det. union + det. parser Agent & dialect model 9Installation + matching
> Total 176 All machine-checked, zero sorry

a 100-agent network achieves full coverage in ∼3 rounds. Receiving agents independently verify dialect constraints (R1–R3) and cryptographic signatures before installation. 

E. Canonical Serialization 

For cryptographic operations (signing, hashing), CBCL uses the canonical form of S-expressions specified in RFC 9804 [14]. This encoding eliminates whitespace vari-ation and uses length-prefixed verbatim strings, ensuring that structurally identical messages produce identical byte representations, a prerequisite for deterministic signature verification. 

VI. Evaluation 

A. Verification Coverage 

The Lean 4 formalization covers parsing, validation, dialect parsing/verification for meta definitions, and a fuel-bounded evaluation model. Table III reports counts for the core safety modules. The verified parser binary cbcl-parse is extracted from the Lean proofs and runs 17 built-in test cases covering all message types, including negative cases for trailing input and unterminated strings. The Rust implementation includes property-based tests (using proptest ), differential tests that cross-check the Rust parser against the Lean-extracted binary, and five 

cargo-fuzz targets covering the S-expression parser, mes-sage parser, dialect parser, constraint verification, and template expansion. Five example dialects (37 performa-tives total) have been verified against the implementation (R1–R3 pass): precision agriculture (11 performatives), AI planning (7), cross-chain asset transfer (7), artifact management (7), and email use (5). 

B. Security Testing 

We validate CBCL’s security properties against concrete attack scenarios: 

Recursive expansion attack. A malicious dialect con-taining (extend bomb (x) (bomb (bomb x))) is rejected at R1 verification; the self-reference is detected before instal-lation. Mutual recursion (e.g., ping expands to pong , pong 

expands to ping ) is also rejected by the implementation. TABLE IV                       

> Benchmark results (Rust, Apple M4).
> Operation Median time
> Parse simple tell message 78 ns Parse meta define 125 ns Parse lang dialect invocation 130 ns Pipeline: simple tell (end-to-end) 386 ns Pipeline: meta define (end-to-end) 1.03 μsTemplate expansion (conditional) 215 ns R1 verify full dialect 1.83 μsR2 bounded eval (nested) 185 ns R3 verify dialect 21 ns Gossip: 100-agent convergence 2.6 ms

Depth bomb. A deeply nested message (lang d1 (lang d2 (lang d3 ...))) exceeding max-depth triggers re-source exhaustion at the enforced limit, returning an error rather than consuming unbounded stack. 

Core redefinition. A dialect attempting (extend tell (x) (drop-table x)) is rejected at R3 verification; tell 

is a core performative and cannot be redefined. 

Expansion bomb. A template producing output larger than max-expansion-size is halted mid-expansion when the cumulative size check fires. In all cases, the parser returns a well-typed error value rather than entering an undefined state. This is the practical consequence of DCFL preservation: the parser is deterministic and total, always terminating with a definite accept or reject. 

C. Performance 

Table IV reports Criterion benchmark results for the Rust implementation on an Apple M4 (macOS 15). The end-to-end pipeline (parse → validate → verify) processes a sim-ple tell message in under 400 ns and a meta define (in-cluding R1–R3 verification) in ∼1 μs. Template expansion completes in 120–350 ns depending on template complexity. Constraint verification is dominated by R1 (dependency-graph cycle detection, ∼1.8 μs for a full dialect); R2 and R3 checks complete in under 25 ns each. Gossip simulation of a 100-agent fully-connected network converges in ∼2.6 ms. These numbers indicate that CBCL’s safety checks impose negligible overhead relative to typical network round-trip times. 

VII. Discussion 

A. Relation to LangSec Principles 

Verifiable parsers. The Lean 4 formalization produces a parser with machine-checked soundness and completeness theorems. The extracted binary constitutes a verified recognizer for the CBCL language. 

Parser equivalence. Because CBCL specifies a single unambiguous grammar that is LR(1)-parseable (and indeed LL(1)), all conformant parsers produce identical parse trees for every input. This eliminates the grammar-level parser differential vulnerabilities that arise when different implementations interpret the same message differently, a problem endemic to protocols with ambiguous gram-mars or natural language content. Canonical serialization (Section V-E ) further reduces—but cannot fully eliminate— implementation-level divergence in areas such as Unicode handling. 

Explicit computational complexity. Every dialect declares its resource requirements, and evaluation is guaran-teed to terminate within those bounds. An implementation can decide before evaluation whether a dialect’s demands are acceptable, yielding explicit worst-case resource bud-gets. This transforms resource governance from a runtime emergency into a design-time contract. 

No parser- or expander-induced weird machines. 

The restriction to declarative pattern-template expansion with bounded resources means that the CBCL parser and template expander introduce no unintended computational artifacts. The template language is not Turing-complete; its semantics are fully determined by a finite substitution table. Weird machines could still arise in layers outside CBCL’s scope (e.g., tool backends or agent action semantics); CBCL’s guarantee is that the message recognition and expansion pipeline itself is free of them. 

B. Comparison with Contemporary Agent Protocols 

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [7] and similar LLM agent frameworks use JSON-RPC with unrestricted schemas. While practical, this design creates an input language whose computational complexity depends on the tools agents invoke, potentially reaching Turing-completeness when they can execute arbitrary code in response to messages. CBCL demonstrates that meaningful extensibility does not require unbounded input complexity. KQML [3] and FIPA-ACL [6] have parseable grammars and limited extensibility (KQML’s performative set was explicitly open; FIPA-ACL supported user-defined message parameters), but extensions were unconstrained by formal safety guarantees and required out-of-band agreement. CBCL inherits their grammar tractability while adding formally safe runtime evolution. 

C. Implementation Strategy 

The Lean 4 formalization and the Rust implementation serve complementary roles. Lean provides machine-checked proofs of the safety properties (Theorems 1–13) and yields an extracted parser binary ( cbcl-parse ) that is correct by construction. However, extracted code optimizes for proof structure, not for runtime performance or integration. The Rust implementation ( cbcl-rs ) provides a production-quality library with O(n) hand-rolled parsing, C FFI and WebAssembly bindings, property-based and differential testing, and fuzz targets—capabilities that are essential for adoption but outside the scope of formal verification. The two implementations are cross-validated: the Rust parser’s test suite includes differential tests against the Lean-extracted binary, ensuring that both accept and reject the same inputs. 

D. Toward Semantic Guidance 

CBCL guarantees syntactic safety but not semantic agreement. Several mechanisms could narrow this gap, with different complexity implications. Examples (supported via 

:examples in dialect definitions) and typed parameter decla-rations add no formal complexity and remain within DCFL. 

Interaction protocol state machines (e.g., after ask , expect 

reply ) are regular, well below DCFL. Pre/postconditions 

and ontological commitment [12] risk crossing the complex-ity boundary CBCL is designed to enforce, and would need to be scoped carefully or relegated to an application layer above the protocol. The :examples clause offers a machine-checkable anchor: a receiving agent should expand each example input through its own expander and compare the result against the expected output before claiming dialect support. This catches the most common interoper-ability failures (template misconfiguration, parameter-type disagreement) before they manifest at runtime, though it cannot detect deeper semantic divergence. Following Singh [19], CBCL treats dialect installation as a public commitment to the dialect’s declared semantics; semantic divergence is thus a breach of commitment, observable and accountable, rather than a hidden failure of shared mental state. We are investigating structural contracts 

that extend CBCL’s syntactic safety toward protocol correctness while remaining within DCFL and requiring no coordination. Protocol constraints are expressed as causal dependency graphs over performative types; each message carries an explicit causal reference (a content hash of its predecessor’s canonical serialisation), forming a Merkle DAG that is cryptographically tamper-evident and independently verifiable. Verification is a monotonic predicate on the append-only message store, coordination-free by the CALM theorem [34]. Message shape constraints are expressed as visibly pushdown languages [32] over expanded S-expressions, exploiting the decidable inclusion checking that VPLs provide. The full design is implemented in cbcl-rs and will be described in a forthcoming report. 

E. Limitations 

Expressiveness ceiling. DCFL restriction means some patterns cannot be expressed in dialect templates. Concrete examples of inexpressible patterns include: (1) recursive data transformations such as flattening a nested list of arbitrary depth; (2) cross-field references where one parameter’s value depends on another parameter’s content (e.g., a checksum computed over other fields); (3) iteration or aggregation over variable-length collections (e.g., sum-ming line items in an invoice); and (4) context-sensitive validation such as ensuring a reply’s thread ID matches an earlier message. In Standish’s extensibility taxonomy [31], CBCL restricts itself to paraphrastic extension (defining new constructs in terms of existing ones), deliberately excluding orthophrase (adding orthogonal features) and metaphrase (altering interpretation rules). This ceiling is a deliberate trade-off: it exists precisely to bound the attack surface. Agents requiring these patterns must implement them in application logic outside the CBCL layer. 

Trust infrastructure. CBCL specifies algorithm-agnostic dialect signing (via an abstract Signer interface) but does not define key distribution, certificate authorities, or revocation. These are left to deployment infrastructure. 

Dialect identity and naming. The DCFL preservation proof ( dcfl_preserved ) requires unique dialect names per agent ( namesUnique ), since the lang tag dispatches by name. The true identity of a dialect is the content hash of its canonical encoding (RFC 9804); two dialects with the same name but different hashes are rejected at installation, mitigating name collisions and downgrade attempts. Dialect churn is bounded by R2 resource limits but requires deployment-level rate limiting for full mitigation. 

Dialect quality and bloat. CBCL constrains dialect 

safety but not dialect quality . Nothing prevents propagation of redundant or poorly designed dialects. Agents can uninstall unhelpful dialects, but the protocol does not define curation mechanisms, leaving lifecycle management to agent policy. 

Performance. The fuel-based termination model in the Lean formalization is sound but conservative. The reference implementation’s runtime resource enforcement adds overhead proportional to the number of expansion steps. 

VIII. Related Work 

A. Language-Theoretic Security 

Sassaman et al. [1] established the foundation for language-theoretic security, observing that mismatch be-tween an input language’s complexity and the parser’s recognizer class raises the likelihood of exploitable errors, and that unanticipated computational artifacts (“weird machines”) arise when input handling violates designer assumptions. Kaminsky, Patterson, and Sassaman [16] demonstrated this concretely with parser differential at-tacks against the X.509 PKI infrastructure. Sassaman et al. [17] extended the analysis to network stacks, framing protocol insecurity as instances of the halting problem. Momot et al. [15] developed a taxonomy of LangSec errors and proposed actionable CWE refactorings to address them. CBCL is, to our knowledge, the first protocol designed from the ground up on these principles for agent communication ,and the first to demonstrate that LangSec constraints are compatible with runtime language self-extension. Von Hippel and Miyazono [28] argue that AI security is fundamentally a LangSec problem, identifying structured output parsing and tool-use capabilities in LLM-based systems as key attack surfaces. Their analysis reinforces the premise underlying CBCL: that securing agent communi-cation requires constraining the computational complexity of the input language, not merely adding ad-hoc validation layers. Fazeldehkordi et al. [18] demonstrated that uncon-strained communication patterns between distributed finan-cial agents can enable DDoS through call-based flooding cycles, using static analysis to detect these patterns at design time. CBCL addresses a related concern at the protocol layer: R2 resource bounds ensure that processing any message, including dialect expansion, terminates within declared limits. 

B. Agent Communication Languages 

KQML [3] introduced speech-act performatives for agent communication; FIPA-ACL [6] later codified 22 perfor-matives with mental-state semantics. Both supported extensibility: KQML through an explicitly open perfor-mative set (communities could define new performatives by agreement), FIPA-ACL through X- prefixed user-defined message parameters. Gruber’s Ontolingua [12] addressed the content layer separately. Building on McCarthy and Hayes’s [8] principle that what is represented can be speci-fied independently of how it is computed, Gruber showed that interoperability between heterogeneous agents requires formal ontological commitment : each agent must commit to the declarative specification of shared concepts (classes, relations, and the axioms constraining their use), with no commitment to the form or content of knowledge internal to the agent. CBCL’s dialect mechanism inherits this com-mitment architecture; a dialect definition is a declarative specification to which the installing agent publicly binds itself, independent of its internal representation. Gruber left the process of reaching consensus on shared ontologies as an open problem, and treated ontology specification as separable from the communication protocol, so that extending shared meaning required out-of-band agreement invisible to protocol-level safety analysis. CBCL addresses the consensus problem directly: agents propose, query, and adopt dialect definitions as ordinary protocol messages. Singh [19] identified a complementary flaw: reliance on unverifiable mental states rather than observable social commitments. CBCL makes dialect installation a protocol-level action subject to machine-checked safety constraints. Yang et al. [21] survey AI agent protocols across seven evaluation dimensions. Deng et al. [22] survey security threats to AI agents, organising them around prompt injec-tion, tool-use risks, and adversarial multi-agent interactions. CBCL’s DCFL constraint directly addresses the parser-level attack surface underlying prompt injection: because dialect extensions are structurally distinct from message content, an agent’s parser never conflates instructions with data. Zhang et al. [23] demonstrate this concretely: their ClawWorm worm achieves a 64.5% attack success rate against the OpenClaw framework by exploiting a flat context trust model in which LLMs cannot distinguish owner instructions from arbitrary channel input. CBCL’s 

lang -scoped dialect mechanism, combined with R1–R3 verification, addresses this root cause by making provenance syntactically explicit. Zhou et al. [24] show that pro-jecting high-dimensional LLM states to natural-language tokens is many-to-one and non-invertible, compounding information loss across conversational turns. A decidable formal language avoids this lossy bottleneck by making coordination semantics explicit in the message structure. Borazjanizadeh and Piantadosi [25] provide complementary evidence. Pairing LLMs with a formal symbolic engine (Pro-log) outperforms pure natural-language chain-of-thought on deductive tasks, suggesting that structured representations improve multi-step reasoning. 

C. Language Extensibility and Formal Methods 

McCarthy’s 1982 proposal [9] envisioned open-ended business communication. Flatt [11] showed how language extensibility can be systematized through first-class lan-guage definitions in Racket. CBCL adapts this principle for adversarial distributed environments and makes the safety constraints explicit. Demers et al. [27] established the O(log n) convergence bound for epidemic information dissemination, which underlies CBCL’s dialect propagation protocol. Jelasity et al. [26] developed theoretical foundations for gossip-based aggregation, proving that the per-round convergence factor is independent of network size; their gossip framework informs CBCL’s peer-selection strategy. RFC 9804 [14] specifies a canonical form for S-expressions used in CBCL for deterministic signature verification. 

IX. Conclusion 

CBCL demonstrates that the LangSec principle of match-ing input language complexity to recognizer capability can be applied even to self-extending protocols. By constraining dialect definitions to declarative pattern-template substitu-tions within S-expression syntax, we show that meaningful runtime extensibility and provable parsing safety are not in conflict. Because safety constraints are machine-checked at installation, agents can create and adopt dialects ad hoc, without external coordination. As autonomous agent systems proliferate, the choice of communication substrate becomes a security decision. Natural language and unrestricted schemas offer maximal flexibility but cannot guarantee that two agents interpret the same message identically, a source of coordination failure even among cooperative agents and a fundamentally unsecurable attack surface in adversarial settings. CBCL offers an alternative: a formally specified, machine-verified protocol where every message, including those that extend the language itself, is parsed in bounded time by adeterministic pushdown automaton. If agents communicate in languages whose validity is undecidable, no monitor can reliably determine what they have agreed to do. Formally bounding what agents can express to each other is a precondition for oversight. Availability. The reference implementation, Lean 4 for-malization, verified parser binary, and IETF Internet-Draft are available at https://codeberg.org/anuna/cbcl-rs under the Apache 2.0 license. The Nostr transport binding is at https://codeberg.org/anuna/cbcl-nostr. 

Acknowledgments 

Thanks to Claire Barnes, David Factor, Mat Mytka, Mark Pesce, Marc Ahrens, Prof. Ingo Weber, Dr Max Ott, Dr Mark Staples, Dr Ho-Pun Lam, Dr Adnene Guabtni, and DZJ for helpful discussions. Thanks to Ric Richardson and the Office for Innovation for championing this effort. This work was inspired by problems encountered during a Science and Industry Endowment Fund project through CSIRO’s Data61, and the need for ad-hoc knowledge sharing across agricultural supply networks. 

AI Disclosure. In accordance with IEEE policy, the author discloses that AI assistants were used throughout this work, including drafting and editing this manuscript, assisting with the Lean 4 formalization, contributing to the reference implementation, and aiding in literature review. Tools used include llm-md, Anthropic’s Claude Code, and OpenAI’s Codex. Agent orchestration was coordinated using hence, the author’s defeasible-logic meta-control planner for multi-agent LLM task coordination. All work was directed, reviewed, and validated by the author. The author takes full responsibility for the content of this publication. 

References 

[1] L. Sassaman, M. L. Patterson, S. Bratus, and M. E. Locasto, “Security applications of formal language theory,” IEEE Systems Journal , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 489–500, Sep. 2013. [2] S. Bratus, M. E. Locasto, M. L. Patterson, L. Sassaman, and A. Shubina, “Exploit programming: From buffer overflows to ‘weird machines’ and theory of computation,” ;login: USENIX Magazine , vol. 36, no. 6, Dec. 2011. [3] T. Finin, R. Fritzson, D. McKay, and R. McEntire, “KQML as an agent communication language,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on Information and Knowledge Management , pp. 456–463, 1994. [4] M. T. Kone, A. Shimazu, and T. Nakajima, “The state of the art in agent communication languages,” Knowledge and Information Systems , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 259–284, 2000. [5] B. Chaib-draa and F. Dignum, “Trends in agent communication language,” Computational Intelligence , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 89–101, 2002. [6] Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents, “FIPA ACL specifi-cations,” 2002. [Online]. Available: https://web.archive.org/web/ 2023/http://www.fipa.org/repository/aclspecs.html [7] Anthropic, “Model Context Protocol specification,” 2025. [On-line]. Available: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/ 2025-03-26 [8] J. McCarthy and P. J. Hayes, “Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence,” in Machine Intelligence 4 

(B. Meltzer and D. Michie, eds.), pp. 463–502, Edinburgh University Press, 1969. [9] J. McCarthy, “Common business communication language,” in 

Textverarbeitung und Bürosysteme (A. Endres and J. Reetz, eds.), R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1982. [Online]. Available: https: //www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/cbcl2.pdf [10] H. O’Connor, “CBCL: A self-extensible agent communication language,” Internet-Draft draft-cbcl-00, 2025. [11] M. Flatt, “Creating languages in Racket,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 48–56, 2012. [12] T. R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology specifications,” Knowledge Acquisition , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199–220, 1993. [13] J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J. D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation , 3rd ed. Pearson, 2006. [14] R. L. Rivest and D. E. Eastlake 3rd, “Simple Public Key Infrastructure (SPKI) S-expressions,” RFC 9804, 2025. [15] F. Momot, S. Bratus, S. M. Hallberg, and M. L. Patterson, “The seven turrets of Babel: A taxonomy of LangSec errors and how to expunge them,” in Proc. IEEE Cybersecurity Development (SecDev) , pp. 45–52, 2016. [16] D. Kaminsky, M. L. Patterson, and L. Sassaman, “PKI layer cake: New collision attacks against the global X.509 infrastructure,” in Financial Cryptography and Data Security , vol. 6052, pp. 289– 303, 2010. [17] L. Sassaman, M. L. Patterson, S. Bratus, and A. Shubina, “The halting problems of network stack insecurity,” ;login: USENIX Magazine , vol. 36, no. 6, 2011. [18] E. Fazeldehkordi, O. Owe, and T. Ramezanifarkhani, “A language-based approach to prevent DDoS attacks in distributed financial agent systems,” in Computer Security , vol. 11981, pp. 258–277, 2020. [19] M. P. Singh, “Agent communication languages: Rethinking the principles,” Computer , vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 40–47, 1998. [20] F. Zambonelli, N. Bicocchi, G. Cabri, L. Leonardi, and M. Pu-viani, “On self-adaptation, self-expression, and self-awareness in autonomic service component ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Conf. on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems Workshops (SASOW) , pp. 108–113, 2011. [21] Y. Yang et al. , “A survey of AI agent protocols,” arXiv:2504.16736, 2025. [22] Z. Deng et al. , “AI agents under threat: A survey of key security challenges and future pathways,” ACM Computing Surveys ,vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1–36, 2025. [23] Y. Zhang et al. , “ClawWorm: Self-propagating attacks across LLM agent ecosystems,” arXiv:2603.15727, 2026. [24] P. Zhou, Y. Feng, H. Julaiti, and Z. Yang, “Why do AI agents communicate in human language?” arXiv:2506.02739, 2025. [25] N. Borazjanizadeh and S. T. Piantadosi, “Reliable reasoning beyond natural language,” arXiv:2407.11373, 2024. [26] M. Jelasity, A. Montresor, and O. Babaoglu, “Gossip-based aggregation in large dynamic networks,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 219–252, 2005. [27] A. Demers et al. , “Epidemic algorithms for replicated database maintenance,” in Proc. 6th ACM Symp. on Principles of Dis-tributed Computing (PODC) , pp. 1–12, 1987. [28] M. Von Hippel and E. Miyazono, “Research report: AI security is a LangSec problem,” in Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW) , pp. 73–78, 2025. [29] N. Chomsky, “Three models for the description of language,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 113–124, 1956. [30] Fiatjaf, “Nostr: Notes and Other Stuff Transmitted by Re-lays (NIP-01),” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md [31] T. A. Standish, “Extensibility in programming language design,” in Proc. National Computer Conference and Exposition , pp. 287– 290, 1975. [32] R. Alur and P. Madhusudan, “Visibly pushdown languages,” in Proc. 36th ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC) ,pp. 202–211, 2004. [33] S. Ginsburg and S. Greibach, “Deterministic context free lan-guages,” Information and Control , vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 620–648, 1966. [34] J. M. Hellerstein and P. Alvaro, “Keeping CALM: When dis-tributed consistency is easy,” Communications of the ACM ,vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 72–81, 2020.