Title: CFMS: A Coarse-to-Fine Multimodal Synthesis Framework for Enhanced Tabular Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10973v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:42:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# CFMS: A Coarse-to-Fine Multimodal Synthesis Framework for Enhanced Tabular Reasoning 

Qixian Huang ∗ Hongqiang Lin ∗ Tong Fu Yingsen Wang Zhenghui Fu Qirui Wang Yiding Sun † Dongxu Zhang †

Abstract —Reasoning over tabular data is a crucial capability for tasks like question answering and fact verification, as it requires models to comprehend both free-form questions and semi-structured tables. However, while methods like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) introduce reasoning chains, purely symbolic methodes are inherently limited by their blindness to holistic visual patterns. To address this, we propose the Coarse-to-Fine Multimodal Synthesis framework (CFMS), a novel two-stage paradigm that hierarchically decouples high-level visual perception from granular symbolic reasoning. In the Coarse Stage, CFMS leverages the Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to perform a one-time synthesis of a multi-perspective knowledge tuple. This tuple subsequently serves as a dynamic reasoning map to guide the fine stage, where a symbolic engine executes a targeted and efficient sequence of iterative operations over the table. Extensive experiments on the WikiTQ and TabFact benchmarks demonstrate that CFMS achieves compet-itive accuracy. The framework exhibits particular robustness when handling large tables and when instantiated with smaller backbone models, validating its effectiveness and generalizability. 

Index Terms —large language model, chain of thought prompt-ing, multimodal reasoning, table understanding 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Tables are a ubiquitous format for organizing and presenting structured information, playing a critical role in domains rang-ing from data analysis to scientific research [1]. Consequently, the ability of artificial intelligence systems to reason over tabular data is of paramount importance [2]. The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has demonstrated remarkable capabilities in natural language understanding [3], yet their proficiency in interpreting the semi-structured nature of tables remains a significant challenge [2], [4]. These models often struggle to grasp the complex interplay between rows and columns that is essential for deep tabular reasoning. To bridge this gap, recent advancements [5], [6] have explored several paradigms for symbolic reasoning. One direc-tion is program-aided reasoning, exemplified by frameworks like Binder [7], which generate executable code to query a static table. Another direction involves modifying the ta-ble itself. Dater [2] decomposes large tables using a fixed set of operations as a preprocessing step to fit within the model’s context window. A more significant step forward is the Chain-of-Table [5] framework, which represents the reasoning process as a dynamic sequence of iterative table operations. However, this paradigm operates within a purely symbolic 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding authors. MLLM  𝑅 𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑙 

CoT Reasoning 

Italy 

LLM  Multi -step 

Reasoning 

The answer is  Spain .

External 

Knowledge  

> Rank

Cyclist 

1 Alejandro 

(ESP) 

2 Davide 

(ITA) 

3 Paolo 

(ITA) 

4 Haimar 

(ESP) 

[Table]: 

[Question]: Which 

country had the 

most cyclists finish 

with in the top3? 

𝑅 𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐 

𝑅 𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦 

(a) Generic Reasoning 

(b) CFMS (ours ) 

> Company

Q1 Price  Q2 Price  Q3 Price  Q4 Price 

AlphaTech  100  102  101  103 

BetaCorp  80  120  70  110 

GammaSys  50  51  49  200 

[Question]: Which company's stock price appears most volatile? 

Planner 

GammaSys 

Symbolic ignores the 

visual pattern. 

Analysis 

Calculate 

Result 

(a) Generic Reasoning 

BetaCorp 

Analysis 

(b) CFMS (ours )

CFMS 

Fig. 1. An illustration of CFMS’s advantage in holistic reasoning. (a) A symbolic-only method must resort to inefficient, brute-force calculations to identify volatility. (b) Our CFMS framework uses the Coarse Stage to synthesize a knowledge tuple Kcoarse , including a visual perception Rvisual 

of a generated chart, which immediately identifies the holistic pattern and guides the Fine Stage to a correct and efficient answer. 

domain, treating tables as mere text. This inherent symbolic blindness prevents the model from perceiving holistic patterns. For questions requiring visual understanding, such as identify-ing trends or outliers, models are forced to resort to inefficient brute-force computations. When faced with a table of stock prices and the question “Which company’s stock price appears most volatile?” A symbolic-only model (Fig. 1a) is blind to the visual pattern. It is forced to resort to inefficient calculations, such as computing the standard deviation or variance for every company in the table. A natural evolution is to incorporate multimodal percep-tion, leveraging the power of MLLMs to see the data in its entirety [8]. However, a naive end-to-end method, where large and complex table images are directly fed into a single MLLMs for iterative reasoning, presents substantial practical challenges. The significant computational overhead and GPU memory (VRAM) requirements for processing high-resolution visual data at each reasoning step can be prohibitive [9], limiting the model’s scalability and applicability to real-world and resource-constrained scenarios. This creates a critical dilemma: how can we harness the rich insights from multi-modal perception without incurring the prohibitive costs of full-scale visual reasoning? To address these challenges, we propose the CFMS frame-work, a hierarchical method that decouples high-level per-

> arXiv:2604.10973v1 [cs.AI] 13 Apr 2026

ception from detailed reasoning. Our motivation stems from the human cognitive process: first gaining a general overview, then delving into specifics. CFMS (Fig. 1b) operationalizes this through a two-stage process. In the initial stage, we leverage external MLLMs [8] to perform a high-level analysis of the table. This stage synthesizes a multi-perspective textual context, including descriptions of visual patterns, relevant semantic knowledge, and statistical summaries. By distilling multimodal insights into a textual format, this stage efficiently circumvents the memory bottleneck of continuous visual pro-cessing. The second stage ingests the original table alongside the lightweight knowledge tuple generated in the coarse stage. This enhanced context guides a symbolic reasoning engine similar to Chain-of-Table [5] to execute an efficient and accurate sequence of table operations. The holistic understand-ing from the coarse stage directs the fine-grained reasoning process toward the most relevant parts of the data. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose the CFMS framework which decouples high-level multimodal perception from low-level symbolic reasoning to enrich the reasoning context.  

> •

We design an efficient knowledge synthesis mechanism that leverages MLLMs to perform a one-time distillation of tabular data.  

> •

We conduct extensive experiments on standard bench-marks, demonstrating that CFMS achieves competitive or superior performance. II. RELATED WORK 

A. Multimodal Large Language Models 

MLLMs represent a significant advancement in artificial in-telligence [8], integrating the sophisticated reasoning capabil-ities of LLMs [9] with the perceptual acuity of vision models [10]. Therefore, MLLMs enable performing complex tasks that require a concurrent understanding of both images and text [11], such as visual question answering, image captioning and multimodal content generation [12], [13]. The power of MLLMs lies in their ability to ground linguistic concepts in visual reality [14], enabling them to reason about objects and their interactions [15] in a way that purely text-based models cannot. This progress has culmi-nated in the development of powerful models like GPT-4V and a variety of open-source alternatives [13]. These models exhibit remarkable zero-shot [16] and few-shot capabilities [17], demonstrating strong performance across a wide array of multimodal tasks [8], [10]. 

B. Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for Tabular Data 

The advent of CoT prompting marked a pivotal moment for LLMs [12], [16], significantly enhancing their reasoning capabilities by enabling them to generate intermediate steps before arriving at a final answer. This core idea was extended by subsequent work, such as decomposing complex problems into simpler subproblems like Few-Shot QA and so on [17]– [19]. However, these generic reasoning frameworks are not specifically designed for the structured nature of tabular data 

Algorithm 1 Coarse-to-Fine Multimodal Synthesis (CFMS) 

Input : Initial table T0, Question Q

Output : Predicted answer ˆA 

> 1:

Kcoarse ← GenerateKnowledge( T0) 

> 2:

T ← T0 

> 3:

while not termination condition do  

> 4:

(o, args ) ← PlanOperation( T, Q, K coarse ) 

> 5:

if o = < END > then  

> 6:

break  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

T ← Execute( o, args, T ) 

> 9:

end while  

> 10:

ˆA ← GenerateAnswer( T, Q, K coarse ) 

> 11:

return ˆA

[1], often failing to effectively leverage the relational informa-tion inherent in rows and columns [20]. To bridge this gap, research has evolved in two primary directions [5]. One prominent line of work involves program-aided reasoning [2], where LLMs are prompted to generate executable code, such as Python or SQL to query the table [7]. This method excels at tasks requiring precise numerical calculations and has been shown to improve arithmetic reason-ing significantly. A more advanced paradigm is iterative table transformation [21]. This method fundamentally extends the CoT concept by using the table itself as the medium for inter-mediate reasoning [16]. Instead of generating textual thoughts, the LLM is guided to produce a sequence of programmatic table operations. Each operation is then executed, creating a new and transformed table that is fed back into the model as the context for the next reasoning step. Concurrently, research in the multimodal domain has fo-cused on enabling MLLMs to understand table images directly [10]. Works like LLaVA [22] have shown that domain-specific instruction tuning is essential for teaching MLLMs to parse visual table structures [3], [5]. III. METHODOLOGY 

A. Problem Formulation 

Given an initial table T0 and an associated question Q, our objective is to learn a function f that maps the input pair (T0, Q) to the answer A. The CFMS framework operational-izes this function through a hierarchical, two-stage process. It first transforms the singular ( T0, Q) input into a rich, multi-perspective knowledge context, upon which subsequent fine-grained reasoning is performed. The overall workflow is illustrated in Fig. 2. We also provide Algorithm 1 for CFMS. 

B. Coarse-Grained Knowledge Enhancement 

The objective of this stage is to construct a multi-dimensional textual context. We leverage external generative models to produce a set of knowledge-enhanced descriptions from three complementary perspectives in parallel. For the visual modality, we employ a two-step procedure to textualize the visual information within the table. First, the Company  Quarter  Revenure                   

> (Billion USD)
> R&D Spend
> (Billion USD)
> AlphaTech Q1 150 15
> AlphaTech Q2 160 18
> BetaCorp Q1 90 12
> BetaCorp Q2 95 10
> GammaSys Q1 120 20
> GammaSys Q2 125 22

[Table  𝑇 0]: 

[Question]: Which company demonstrated the 

most efficient R&D spending in Q2 by having the 

highest revenue -to -R&D ratio? 

Input  Coarse -Stage 

Visual Perspective  𝑅 𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑙 

𝐾 𝑐𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒 

The chart shows that AlphaTech consistently has the 

highest revenue and R&D spending across both quarters. 

📃  Statistical Perspective  𝑅 𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦 

The table indicates significant revenue generation and 

R&D investment across the listed technology companies. 

Semantic Perspective  𝑅 𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐 

AlphaTech: A major technology in cloud computing and AI. 

BetaCorp: A hardware and consumer electronics company. 

GammaSys: An enterprise software and solutions provider. 

Chart Description 

Key Columns: 

Revenue,R&D Spend. 

Revenue: Max=160, 

Min=90, Avg=123.33. 

R&D Spend: Max=22, 

Min=10, Avg=16.17. 

📃 

Step1: LLM receives  𝑇 0, 𝑄 ,

𝐾 𝑐𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒  and begins reasoning 

Analysis 

Step2:Identify the core 

computing requirements 

Add a new column to 

calculate this ratio.     

> Company Quarter Revenure R&D Spend Efficiency_Ratio

Step3:Clarify the 

scope of the question 

𝑇 1

Filter out the data of 

𝑄 2 from table  𝑇 1

SELECT * 

FROM  𝑇 1

WHERE Quarter = 'Q2';   

> f_add_col(Efficiency_Ratio)
> f_select_row(2,4,6)
> f_group_by(Efficiency_Ratio)
> Company Efficiency_Ratio
> BetaCorp 9.5

Complete Operation 

+📃 

> BetaCorp

Fine -Stage Fig. 2. An overview of the CFMS framework. The process begins with the Coarse Stage, where the initial table T0 is analyzed from multiple perspectives (visual, semantic, statistical) to synthesize a textual knowledge tuple Kcoarse . Subsequently, in the Fine Stage, an LLM planner leverages this holistic context to guide a step-by-step iterative reasoning process, executing a sequence of precise table operations to derive the final answer. 

table T0 is combined with a prompt Pchart and input into a code-generating LLM Gcode to generate visualization code. The model selects the most suitable chart format and the execution of this code yields a chart C0 [23], [24]. Subsequently, the resulting chart C0 is fed into a MLLMs Mvlm along with a descriptive prompt Pvisual desc to generate a textual description 

Rvisual , which captures the key visual patterns: 

Rvisual = Mvlm (C0 ⊕ Pvisual desc ), (1) where ⊕ denotes the concatenation of input content. For the semantic modality, we aim to ground the symbolic entities within the table in real-world context. To this end, we generate a semantic rationale Rsemantic by employing a knowledge generation model Gkg , in conjunction with a prompt 

Psemantic . This process extracts commonsense knowledge re-lated to key entities present in T0:

Rsemantic = Gkg (T0 ⊕ Psemantic ). (2) For the statistical modality, we generate a textual summary 

Rsummary to equip the model with a quantitative summary of the table’s contents. This is achieved by employing a standard LLM Gllm guided by a CoT prompt Psummary . The prompt directs the model to first identify key numerical columns, calculate their essential statistics ( e.g. , maximum, minimum, average) and then synthesize these findings into a concise natural language conclusion: 

Rsummary = Gllm (T0 ⊕ Psummary ). (3) Collectively, the descriptions generated from these comple-mentary perspectives are aggregated to form a final knowledge tuple Kcoarse . This tuple encapsulates a multimodal understand-ing of the initial table in a compact textual format, guiding the LLM planner to execute more targeted operations for the fine-grained reasoning stage that follows. 

C. Fine-Grained Iterative Reasoning 

This stage functions as the core reasoning engine of the framework, initiating a knowledge-guided and iterative table evolution process that extends the core mechanism of Chain-of-Table. It takes the original table T0 and the knowledge tuple 

Kcoarse as input, transforming the static table into a dynamic reasoning canvas [25], [26]. At any timestep t, the reasoning state is defined by the current table Tt and the history of operations Ht, denoted as St = ( Tt, H t). The central mechanism is a knowledge-guided dynamic planning step, where an LLM-based planning policy πllm , selects the subsequent table operation ot+1 and its corresponding arguments args t+1 . This decision is based on the current state St, the question Q, and the tuple Kcoarse :

(ot+1 , args t+1 ) ∼ πllm (St, Q, K coarse ). (4) Here, ot+1 denotes the selected atomic operation and 

args t+1 represents the specific parameters required to execute it. Following this step, the selected operation is applied to the current table Tt to produce the subsequent table state Tt+1 :

Tt+1 = ot+1 (Tt, args t+1 ). (5) The operation history is updated accordingly: Ht+1 = Ht ⊕

(ot+1 , args t+1 ). The fine-grained planner πllm selects opera-tions from a predefined symbolic pool. This set is informed by previous work [5]. It includes essential operations for table manipulation such as f add column to create new computed columns, f select column to subset columns, f select row 

to filter rows, and f group by , f sort by for aggregation or ordering. This iterative process continues until the planner generates a termination token < END >. At each step t, the planner model receives a consolidated prompt containing the general question Q, the complete knowledge tuple Kcoarse ,and the current serialized table Tt. This guides the planner to select the most relevant operation ot+1 from the symbolic pool that aligns with the high-level insights, rather than resorting to brute-force exploration or sampling. 

D. Final Answer Generation 

Upon the termination of the fine-grained reasoning loop, the process produces a final evolved table Tf inal . This table encapsulates the precise data required to address the query. To generate the definitive answer, this final table Tf inal is concatenated with the original question Q and the complete knowledge tuple Kcoarse . This comprehensive final context 

Cf inal is then inputted into the language model Gllm to produce the final answer A:

A = Gllm (Cfinal ). (6) The model synthesizes all available information including the original query, the coarse-grained holistic knowledge, and the results of the fine-grained symbolic operations to formulate its definitive response. IV. EXPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Settings 

Datasets We evaluated the effectiveness of our CFMS framework on two established public benchmarks: WikiTQ [27] and TabFact [28]. WikiTQ is a question-answering dataset that necessitates complex reasoning over tables to derive a short text span as the answer. Following the official guidelines, we report performance using denotation accuracy. TabFact serves as a benchmark for table-based fact verification. The objective is to determine whether a given textual statement is true or false based on the provided table. For this task, we measure performance using binary classification accuracy. 

Implementation Details For the coarse stage, we utilize GPT-4V to generate visual descriptions from charts and GPT-4 [29] to produce semantic and statistical summaries. For the fine stage, we employ a suite of powerful LLMs to serve as the backbone planner. Our experiments utilize GPT-3.5-Turbo and LLaMA-2-13B-Chat to ensure a complete evaluation across different model architectures. All experiments are conducted using a few-shot and in-context learning method. 

Baseline Models We compare our CFMS framework against two main categories. Generic Reasoning category includes methods that treat the table as serialized text and rely on the LLM’s general reasoning abilities. Baselines in                                                    

> TABLE I TABLE UNDERSTANDING RESULTS ON TAB FACT AND WIKI TQ DATASETS ACROSS GPT 3.5 AND LL AMA 2 MODELS . W E REPORT ACCURACY (%).
> Methods GPT 3.5 LLaMA 2 TabFact WikiTQ TabFact WikiTQ
> End-to-End QA 70.45 51.84 44.86 23.90 Few-Shot QA 71.54 52.56 62.01 35.52 Chain-of-Thought 65.37 53.48 60.52 36.05 Chain-of-Table 80.20 59.94 67.24 42.61 Text-to-SQL 64.71 52.90 64.03 36.14 Binder 79.17 56.74 62.76 30.92 Dater 78.01 52.81 65.12 41.44 CFMS (ours) 81.37 61.42 68.53 43.89
> TABLE II PERFORMANCE OF RELATED METHODS ON SMALL ,MEDIUM ,AND LARGE TABLES FROM WIKI TQ. W E ALSO REPORT ACCURACY (%).

Methods Table Size Small Medium Large 

Binder 56.54 26.13 6.41 Dater 62.50 42.34 34.62 CFMS (ours) 69.26 53.47 46.92 

this group include End-to-End QA, Few-Shot QA [30], and Chain-of-Thought [16]. Program-Aided Reasoning leverages more structured methods, either by generating code or directly manipulating the table. Baselines in this group include Text-to-SQL [31], Binder [7], and Dater [2]. 

B. Overall Results 

We evaluated our proposed CFMS framework on WikiTQ and TabFact. The main results are presented in Table I. Our method outperforms all baseline methods in both datasets and both backbone models. From the results, we observe that CFMS consistently delivers state-of-the-art performance. For instance, our framework achieves an accuracy of 81.37% on TabFact and 61.42% on WikiTQ with GPT 3.5. Compared to an End-to-End QA method, CFMS yields a performance increase of 10.92% on TabFact and 9.58% on WikiTQ. Furthermore, we observe that the architectural benefits of CFMS are evident across LLMs of varying scales. While the performance of all methods decreases substantially when shifting from GPT 3.5 to the smaller LLaMA 2 model, CFMS maintains its SOTA position relative to the baselines. On WikiTQ, CFMS (68.53%) still outperforms Dater (65.12%) and Binder (62.76%), which suggests the structural advantage of the CFMS framework is robust. To assess the robustness of our framework on tables of various sizes, we categorize the test samples from WikiTQ into three groups based on their token count: small ( <2000 tokens), medium (2000 to 4000 tokens), and large ( >4000 tokens). We compare CFMS with Dater and Binder. The detailed results are presented in Table II. The performance of all methods de-creases as the input table size increases. Nevertheless, CFMS TABLE III NUMBER OF QUERIES GENERATED FOR A SINGLE QUESTION IN THE PROPOSED CFMS ON THE WIKI TQ DATASET .

Methods Total # of queries # of queries in each step 

Binder 50 Generate Program: 50 Dater 100 Decompose Table: 40; Generate Cloze: 20; Generate SQL: 20; Query: 20 CFMS (ours) ≤15 Coarse Stage: 4; Fine Stage: ≤10; Final Query: 1 

demonstrates superior resilience. While Dater’s accuracy drops by 27.9 points on large tables, CFMS’s accuracy drops by only 22.3 points. This robustness in complex and long-context scenarios increases CFMS’s absolute accuracy advantage over Dater from 6.76% on small tables to 12.3% on large tables, validating the effectiveness of our coarse-to-fine method. In the fine-grained reasoning stage of our CFMS framework, the number of operations is not fixed but is dynamically deter-mined based on the complexity of the question and the table. Therefore, we conduct a detailed study on the performance under different numbers of operations by categorizing the test samples from WikiTQ. For each chain length, we plot the accuracy of all methods in Fig. 3. Notably, CFMS consistently surpasses both baseline methods across all operation chain lengths, maintaining a significant performance margin. 

C. Analysis 

Case Study In Fig. 2, we illustrate the end-to-end rea-soning process of our CFMS framework on a representative task. The question poses a complex analytical challenge, which requires the model to first interpret the abstract concept of “R&D efficiency” as a “revenue-to-R&D ratio.” Subsequently, it must calculate this new metric for each entry, filter the results to the relevant quarter ( Q2), and ultimately identify the company with the maximum ratio. Our proposed CFMS framework first addresses this in the Coarse Stage. Instead of immediately performing symbolic operations, it synthesizes a multi-perspective knowledge tuple ( Kcoarse ). This initial step provides the model with a crucial high-level understanding. This holistic context then guides the Fine Stage. The LLM planner does not perform a blind search. Its first action is to address the central requirement of the question by planning an add column operation to compute the “Efficiency Ratio”. Subsequently, it narrows the scope by executing a select row 

operation to filter for the “ Q2” data before finding the final answer. The intermediate tables, therefore, represent a thought process that has been intelligently directed from the outset. 

Efficiency Analysis We analyze the efficiency of our CFMS framework by evaluating the number of LLM queries required to answer a single question, as presented in Table III. This metric reflects the complexity and efficiency of the reasoning path rather than the raw computational cost of 1 2 3 4 5                                

> Length of Operation Chain
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> Accuracy (%)
> Chain-of-Thought
> Dater
> CFMS (ours)
> Fig. 3. Performance of the proposed CFMS on WikiTQ for questions that require an operation chain of varying lengths. TABLE IV ABLATION STUDY OF THE CFMS FRAMEWORK ON TAB FACT AND
> WIKI TQ DATASETS . W E REPORT ACCURACY (%).
> Methods TabFact WikiTQ Accuracy Accuracy
> CFMS 81.37 61.42
> w/o fadd column () 80.10 (1 .27 ↓)58.86 (2 .56 ↓)
> w/o fselect column () 77.61 (3 .76 ↓)58.29 (3 .13 ↓)
> w/o fselect row () 76.79 (4 .58 ↓)57.65 (3 .77 ↓)
> w/o fgroup by () 79.43 (1 .94 ↓)55.02 (6 .40 ↓)
> w/o fsort by () 80.88 (0 .49 ↓)58.61 (2 .81 ↓)

individual queries. Methods like Binder and Dater often rely on large-scale self-consistency sampling to boost performance, which involves generating a large number of candidate outputs to ensure robustness. While effective, this brute-force sampling method is inefficient. In contrast, CFMS introduces a small number of queries in the Coarse Stage to synthesize the 

Kcoarse . This initial synthesis provides high-level guidance that makes the subsequent Fine Stage remarkably targeted. The guided Fine Stage requires ≤ 10 deterministic operations, bringing the total query count to ≤ 15 . We acknowledge that the Coarse Stage queries represent a higher cost and latency per query than the simpler baseline queries. However, this is a one-time investment. This trade-off is favorable, as it allows CFMS to achieve superior accuracy and robustness while drastically reducing the total number of reasoning steps. 

D. Ablation Study 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we per-formed several ablation studies. We remove one of the pre-defined operations ( e.g. , f add column () , f select row () ,etc.) from the available operation pool. Consequently, the LLM planner must construct its reasoning chain using only the remaining operations. We report the results of this ablation study in Table IV. As we can see, all operations contribute to the final state-of-the-art performance, as removing any single operation results in a notable decrease in accuracy on both datasets. We also observe that f select row () and 

f select column () are the most critical operations for the TABLE V ABLATION STUDY OF THE CORE COMPONENTS OF OUR CFMS  

> FRAMEWORK ON

TAB FACT AND WIKI TQ DATASETS .

Methods TabFact WikiTQ Accuracy Accuracy 

CFMS (Full Model) 81.37 61.42 

w/o Coarse Stage 73.55 (7 .82 ↓) 55.18 (6 .24 ↓)

w/o Fine Stage 75.96 (5 .41 ↓) 56.44 (4 .98 ↓)

TabFact benchmark, with performance drops of 4.58% and 3.76%, respectively. To validate the contributions of the two core components of our CFMS framework. We conducted a comprehensive ablation study. We report the results of this study in Table V. As shown, the removal of either stage leads to a significant degradation in performance, confirming that both are integral to the success of our framework. The substantial drop in accuracy for the w/o Coarse Stage variant underscores the importance of the initial knowledge synthesis. This study also validates our core motivation: the synergistic combination of high-level perception (Coarse Stage) and detailed manipulation (Fine Stage) is key to achieving state-of-the-art performance in complex tabular reasoning. V. CONCLUSION In this work, we propose the CFMS framework, a novel hierarchical system that effectively decouples high-level per-ception from detailed symbolic reasoning. CFMS first employs a Coarse Stage, where powerful MLLMs perform a one-time synthesis from visual, semantic, and statistical viewpoints. This textual “reasoning map” then guides a Fine Stage of iterative, symbolic table transformations. Our extensive exper-iments on the WikiTQ and TabFact benchmarks demonstrate that CFMS achieves strong performance. While acknowledg-ing the computational trade-off in the Coarse Stage and the potential for error propagation in the reasoning map, these areas highlight critical directions for future work in enhancing efficiency and robustness. This research advocates for a shift from monolithic reasoning paradigms to hierarchical, coarse-to-fine strategies that mimic human cognition. We hope our investigations pave the way for future advancements [32]– [34] in multimodal integration and enhance the reliability, robustness, and effectiveness of LLM reasoning on structured data [35]–[37]. REFERENCES [1] Xuanliang Zhang, Dingzirui Wang, Longxu Dou, Qingfu Zhu, and Wanxiang Che, “A survey of table reasoning with large language models,” Frontiers of Computer Science , vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 199348, 2025. [2] Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li, “Large language models are versatile decomposers: Decomposing evidence and questions for table-based reasoning,” in Proceedings of the 46th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval , 2023, pp. 174–184. [3] Naihao Deng, Zhenjie Sun, Ruiqi He, Aman Sikka, Yulong Chen, Lin Ma, Yue Zhang, and Rada Mihalcea, “Tables as texts or images: Evaluating the table reasoning ability of llms and mllms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12424 , 2024. [4] Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, “Findings of the association for computational linguistics: Emnlp 2024,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , 2024. [5] Zilong Wang, Hao Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Vincent Perot, Zifeng Wang, Lesly Miculicich, Yasuhisa Fujii, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, et al., “Chain-of-table: Evolving tables in the rea-soning chain for table understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04398 ,2024. [6] Ziqi Jin and Wei Lu, “Tab-cot: Zero-shot tabular chain of thought,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17812 , 2023. [7] Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, Chengzu Li, Rahul Nadkarni, Yushi Hu, Caiming Xiong, Dragomir Radev, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, et al., “Binding language models in symbolic languages,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02875 , 2022. [8] Yaoting Wang, Shengqiong Wu, Yuecheng Zhang, Shuicheng Yan, Ziwei Liu, Jiebo Luo, and Hao Fei, “Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning: A comprehensive survey, 2025,” URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.12605 ,2025. [9] Simin Chen, Yiming Chen, Zexin Li, Yifan Jiang, Zhongwei Wan, Yixin He, Dezhi Ran, Tianle Gu, Haizhou Li, Tao Xie, et al., “Recent advances in large langauge model benchmarks against data contamination: From static to dynamic evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17521 , 2025. [10] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 36, pp. 34892–34916, 2023. [11] Victor Carbune, Hassan Mansoor, Fangyu Liu, Rahul Aralikatte, Gilles Baechler, Jindong Chen, and Abhanshu Sharma, “Chart-based rea-soning: Transferring capabilities from llms to vlms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12596 , 2024. [12] Dongxu Zhang, Ning Yang, Jihua Zhu, Jinnan Yang, Miao Xin, and Bao-liang Tian, “Ascot: An adaptive self-correction chain-of-thought method for late-stage fragility in llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05282 , 2025. [13] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al., “Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforce-ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. [14] Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang, Boyang Li, Pascale N Fung, and Steven Hoi, “Instruct-blip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 36, pp. 49250–49267, 2023. [15] Pan Zhang, Xiaoyi Dong, Bin Wang, Yuhang Cao, Chao Xu, Linke Ouyang, Zhiyuan Zhao, Haodong Duan, Songyang Zhang, Shuangrui Ding, et al., “Internlm-xcomposer: A vision-language large model for advanced text-image comprehension and composition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15112 , 2023. [16] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 24824–24837, 2022. [17] Rakesh Chada and Pradeep Natarajan, “Fewshotqa: A simple framework for few-shot learning of question answering tasks using pre-trained text-to-text models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01951 , 2021. [18] Dongxu Zhang, Yiding Sun, Cheng Tan, Wenbiao Yan, Ning Yang, Jihua Zhu, and Haijun Zhang, “Chain-of-thought compression should not be blind: V-skip for efficient multimodal reasoning via dual-path anchoring,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13879 , 2026. [19] Dongxu Zhang, Hongqiang Lin, Yiding Sun, Pengyu Wang, Qirui Wang, Ning Yang, and Jihua Zhu, “Not all queries need deep thought: Coficot for adaptive coarse-to-fine stateful refinement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08251 , 2026. [20] Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Veselin Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin, “Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 26106–26128. [21] Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig, “Pal: Program-aided language models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 10764–10799. [22] Bin Lin, Yang Ye, Bin Zhu, Jiaxi Cui, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan, “Video-llava: Learning united visual representation by align-ment before projection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122 , 2023. [23] Dongxu Zhang, Jihua Zhu, Shiqi Li, Wenbiao Yan, Haoran Xu, Peilin Fan, and Huimin Lu, “Igasa: Integrated geometry-aware and skip-attention modules for enhanced point cloud registration,” IEEE Trans-actions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 2026. [24] Yiding Sun, Jihua Zhu, Haozhe Cheng, Chaoyi Lu, Zhichuan Yang, Lin Chen, and Yaonan Wang, “Align then adapt: Rethinking parameter-efficient transfer learning in 4d perception,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23069 , 2026. [25] Qirui Wang, Qi Guo, Yiding Sun, Junkai Yang, Dongxu Zhang, Shan-min Pang, and Qing Guo, “Personalq: Select, quantize, and serve personalized diffusion models for efficient inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22943 , 2026. [26] Dongxu Zhang, Yingsen Wang, Yiding Sun, Haoran Xu, Peilin Fan, and Jihua Zhu, “Cmhanet: A cross-modal hybrid attention network for point cloud registration,” Neurocomputing , p. 133318, 2026. [27] Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang, “Compositional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.00305 , 2015. [28] Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou, and William Yang Wang, “Tabfact: A large-scale dataset for table-based fact verification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02164 , 2019. [29] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al., “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [30] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1877– 1901, 2020. [31] Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau, “Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498 , 2022. [32] Yingsen Wang, Dongxu Zhang, Yixiao Li, Weihan Jiao, Guibin Wang, Juanjuan Zhao, Yan Qiang, and Keqin Li, “Enhancing power grid resilience with blockchain-enabled vehicle-to-vehicle energy trading in renewable energy integration,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applica-tions , vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 2037–2052, 2023. [33] Aoyu Li, Jingwen Li, Dongxu Zhang, Wei Wu, Juanjuan Zhao, and Yan Qiang, “Synergy through integration of digital cognitive tests and wearable devices for mild cognitive impairment screening,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , vol. 17, pp. 1183457, 2023. [34] Yuting Xue, Dongxu Zhang, Liye Jia, Wanting Yang, Juanjuan Zhao, Yan Qiang, Long Wang, Ying Qiao, and Huajie Yue, “Integrating image and gene-data with a semi-supervised attention model for prediction of kras gene mutation status in non-small cell lung cancer,” Plos one , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. e0297331, 2024. [35] Dongxu Zhang, Yiding Sun, Pengcheng Li, Yumou Liu, Hongqiang Lin, Haoran Xu, Xiaoxuan Mu, Liang Lin, Wenbiao Yan, Ning Yang, et al., “Pointcot: A multi-modal benchmark for explicit 3d geometric reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23945 , 2026. [36] Yankai Wang, Yiding Sun, Qirui Wang, Pengbo Li, Chaoyi Lu, and Dongxu Zhang, “Pointrft: Explicit reinforcement fine-tuning for point cloud few-shot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.23957 , 2026. [37] Yiding Sun, Haozhe Cheng, Chaoyi Lu, Zhengqiao Li, Minghong Wu, Huimin Lu, and Jihua Zhu, “Hyperpoint: Multimodal 3d foundation model in hyperbolic space,” Pattern Recognition , p. 112800, 2025.