Title: GRASP: Gradient Realignment via Active Shared Perception for Multi-Agent Collaborative Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00717v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:01:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# GRASP: Gradient Realignment via Active Shared Perception for Multi-Agent Collaborative Optimization 

Sihan Zhou 1 Tiantian He 2 Yifan Lu 1 Yaqing Hou 1 Yew-Soon Ong 2 3 

# Abstract 

Non-stationarity arises from concurrent policy up-dates and leads to persistent environmental fluc-tuations. Existing approaches like Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) and sequential update schemes mitigate this is-sue. However, since the perception of the policies of other agents remains dependent on sampling environmental interaction data, the agent essen-tially operates in a passive perception state. This inevitably triggers equilibrium oscillations and significantly slows the convergence speed of the system. To address this issue, we propose Gra-dient Realignment via Active Shared Perception (GRASP), a novel framework that defines general-ized Bellman equilibrium as a stable objective for policy evolution. The core mechanism of GRASP involves utilizing the independent gradients of agents to derive a defined consensus gradient, en-abling agents to actively perceive policy updates and optimize team collaboration. Theoretically, we leverage the Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem to prove that the consensus direction u∗ guaran-tees the existence and attainability of this equi-librium. Extensive experiments on StarCraft II Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) and Google Re-search Football (GRF) demonstrate the scalability and promising performance of the framework. 

# 1. Introduction 

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) (Qin et al.) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for addressing com-

> 1

College of Computer Science and Technology, and Key Labo-ratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence (Ministry of Education), Dalian University of Technology, China 2Center for Frontier AI Research, Institute of High Performance Comput-ing, Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 

> 3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Techno-logical University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yaqing Hou 

<houyq@dlut.edu.cn >.

Preprint. April 2, 2026. 

plex sequential decision-making problems involving multi-ple autonomous agents (Zhou et al., 2025). However, the transition from single-agent to multi-agent settings intro-duces a fundamental challenge, non-stationarity (Qiu et al., 2021). During the learning and interaction process, each agent perceives other agents as part of its environment. As all agents are simultaneously updating their policies, the en-vironment from the perspective of any single agent becomes non-stationary (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019). This leads to a persistent policy interplay where policies are in con-stant flux, severely complicating the convergence of learning algorithms. To mitigate this issue, the Centralized Training with Decen-tralized Execution (CTDE) (Lowe et al., 2017) framework was proposed. By leveraging a centralized critic with access to global information, CTDE can provide more stable value estimates (Rashid et al., 2020). Despite employing a central-ized critic to stabilize the training environment of the critic and guide the updates of the actor, the actor remains blind during policy updates. Decentralized actors simultaneously update their policies without explicit coordination, caus-ing the equilibrium point and ultimate optimization goal of the entire multi-agent system to constantly shift (Gao et al., 2025). This indicates that the non-stationarity issue in policy learning dynamics persists. Another researches address non-stationarity through serial-ization mechanisms, categorizable into sequential updates and sequential execution. Methods like HAPPO (Zhong et al., 2024) employ sequential updates, discretizing the training process into time slices where only a single agent updates its policy at a time. While this creates a temporar-ily stationary environment locally (Liu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023), the resulting stationarity is fragmented and discontinuous. During update intervals, the policy distribu-tions of the remaining agents continue to evolve, leading to overall policy updates that remain synchronized across multiple overlapping time slices. This prevents smooth con-vergence of the joint policy (Yu et al., 2025). On the other hand, sequential decision methods (Li et al., 2023) construct weakly stationary environments by propagating the actions of preceding agents within a single time step. However, the actions passed represent only a stochastic point estimation 1

> arXiv:2604.00717v1 [cs.MA] 1 Apr 2026 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026

of the preceding policy, making it difficult for subsequent agents to capture the full distribution of upstream policies and introducing high variance. While these methods introduce a degree of coordination, they rely on what we term passive perception of policy up-dates (Jaques et al., 2019). An agent is unaware of how other agents update their policies. It can only infer changes in policies of other agents by collecting new interaction data from the environment. This inference process is slow and inefficient. Particularly in the early stages of training, when policies change drastically, an agent may still be adapting to a previous policy of another agent that has already changed again (Reddi et al., 2025). This means that there is no clear objective for optimizing agent policies in a Multi-Agent Sys-tem (MAS), which can only guarantee that an equilibrium point always exists, but this point is not explicitly defined. To address these challenges and mitigate the impact of non-stationarity in multi-agent collaboration, we propose the Gradient Realignment via Active Shared Perception (GRASP) framework. This framework explicitly defines a generalized Bellman equilibrium as the stable objective for policy evolution. Specifically, the core of the GRASP framework lies in utilizing the independent gradients of each agent to compute a defined consensus gradient, en-abling agents to actively perceive the policy evolution of other members and thereby optimize team collaboration. To provide a theoretical basis for the computation of consensus gradients, we employ Monotonic Improvement Analysis and Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem to establish the neces-sary conditions for the consensus gradient operator f (·).In practical implementation, we introduce a quadratic pro-gramming (QP) (Sener & Koltun, 2018) model to solve for consensus gradients. Moreover, it demonstrates that the incentive-compatible consensus direction u∗ constructed from this QP formulation satisfies the derived key proper-ties. This consensus direction leads to the existence of fixed points in the joint parameter space, thereby establishing the reachability of the generalized Bellman equilibrium. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: • We propose the GRASP framework , which estab-lishes incentive-compatible consensus by actively aligning individual updates with global gradients, ensuring collective consistency during synchronized learning. • We define Generalized Bellman Equilibrium to char-acterize Pareto-optimal steady states, formally proving its existence and convergence in non-stationary envi-ronments via Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem. • We conduct extensive empirical evaluations across a diverse set of challenging benchmarks, including the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge ( SMAC ), its stochas-tic variant SMACv2 , Google Research Football ( GRF ), and the Multi-Agent Particle Environment ( MPE ). Ex-perimental results demonstrate that GRASP consis-tently outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both sample efficiency and asymptotic win rates. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Non-stationarity and Perception Modes in MARL 

Non-stationarity remains a fundamental obstacle in MARL. Existing research primarily attempts to mitigate this issue through two dimensions, spatial decomposition and tem-poral sequencing. First, spatial dimension approaches, the CTDE paradigm decouples the information structure be-tween learning and deployment. Algorithms in this category, such as (Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient) MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017), employ a centralized critic that augments the local observation with global state infor-mation to stabilize value estimation. Similarly, value de-composition methods like Value-Decomposition Networks (VDN) and Q-decomposition Multi-agent Independent eX-tension (QMIX) (Rashid et al., 2020) utilize a centralized mixing network (Mixer) to aggregate local utilities into a global objective Qtot . These methods aim to construct a global state value assessment via centralized Critic or Mixer components, thereby creating a semi-stationary environ-ment. However, this is fundamentally a compromise. While the Critic gains global information, the decentralized Actors still blindly update within a constantly drifting joint policy space. This weak stationarity does not resolve the dynamic interference at the policy learning level. Second, temporal dimension approaches seek stationarity through serialization. For instance, HAPPO (Zhong et al., 2024) converts concurrent training into sequential training via serialized updates, while ACE (Li et al., 2023) introduces serialized decision-making at execution. Though these meth-ods establish temporary stationarity within individual time slices or decision steps, their discrete, segmented stationar-ity fails to integrate into continuous, smooth optimization trajectories over global long-term cycles. In other words, local temporal stationarity cannot bridge global policy non-stationarity. 

2.2. Gradient Conflict and Consensus Optimization 

Reconciling divergent objectives is a central challenge in both Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Yu et al., 2020) and MARL. In the domain of MTL, prominent algorithms like Projected Conflicting Gradients (PCGrad) (Yu et al., 2020) and Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm (MGDA) (Sener & Koltun, 2018) have been developed to mitigate gradient in-terference. These methods function by projecting conflicting gradients onto a normal plane or finding a minimum-norm vector within the convex hull, aiming to balance multiple 2Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

tasks within a single model architecture. These methods provide different options for computing formula gradients within the GRASP framework we propose. 

2.3. Trust-Region Considerations and Fixed-Point Theory 

Ensuring stable convergence in high-dimensional policy spaces often necessitates trust-region methods, such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015a; Kuba et al., 2022) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), to prevent large, destructive updates that violate the validity of local linear approxima-tions. These methods typically rely on heuristic ϵ-clipping or Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence constraints to restrict the magnitude of policy changes. While trust-region constraints guarantee monotonic improvement in single-agent settings, extending them to multi-agent environments proves chal-lenging. The non-stationarity induced by concurrent updates causes the joint policy to shift, rendering the local approxi-mation of the surrogate objective inaccurate and destabiliz-ing the safe update region for individual agents (Schulman et al., 2015a). 

# 3. Method 

In this section, we detail the theoretical foundations, algo-rithmic implementation, and convergence analysis of the proposed GRASP framework. Section 3.1 introduces the extended Decentralized Partially Observable Markov De-cision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Jung et al., 2025), defining the consensus gradient, its properties, and the Generalized Bellman Equilibrium. Subsequently, Section 3.2 describes the policy update methodology within the GRASP frame-work. The section concludes with a theoretical analysis in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, which establish the convergence guarantees for both policy and value function updates. 

3.1. Formalization of Multi-Agent Policy Collaborative Update 

We model the multi-agent task as a stochastic game for N agents, defined by the Dec-POMDP tuple M =

< N, S, A, O, P, R, Ω, γ, u ∗ >, where N is the number of agents. S denotes the space of environmental states. A =

{A i}i=1 ,2,...,N represents the action spaces for all agents, where Ai is the action set of agent i. O = {O i}i=1 ,2,...,N 

represents the observation spaces for all agents, where Oi is the observation set of agent i. P (s′|s, a) : S × A × S → 

[0 , 1] represents the state transition function, defining the probability of transitioning to state s′ given the current state 

s and the joint action a = ( a1, a 2, ..., a N ). The team reward function is R : S × A → R, which maps a state and joint action to a shared reward. The observation function Ω( s, i ) : 

S → Oi determines the private observation oti ∈ Oi for agent i at time t, which is derived as oti = Ω( st, i ). Finally, 

γ ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the discount factor. Each agent aims to learn the joint policy {πi(ai|oi)}Ni=1 that maximizes the expected discounted global return J(θ) = E[P∞ 

> t=0

γtRt ∼R(st, {ati ∼ πi(ai|oi, θ i)}Ni=1 )] , where Rt is the team re-ward in timestep t. In the team reward setting, the opti-mization objective for individual agent i is expressed as 

Ji(θi) = J(θi, θ−i) = Eτ ∼(πi,π−i) [P∞ 

> t=0

γtRt] . The u∗

represents the collective improvement direction for the team. In standard MARL, agent i updates its policy using the local gradient gi(θ) = ∇θi J(θ). However, the local gradient gi

may conflict with the collective improvement direction u∗

of the team. This issue is because although the objective function J is identical across agents, gi represents a partial derivative limited to local parameters. As a result, it fails to capture the simultaneous variations occurring in the rest of the team during the update phase. To address this issue, we seek a consensus direction u∗ that aligns individual updates. 

Definition 3.1 (Optimal Collaboration Policy) . π∗ 

> i

∈{πi}∗Ni=1 , where {πi}∗Ni=1 denotes the optimal joint pol-icy of the team, and π∗ 

> i

is not an individual’s optimal policy but rather the policy that maximizes the team’s discount return J(θ).

Theorem 3.2 (Gradient Realignment via Active Shared Perception Framework) . When a u∗ satisfying the defini-tion can be obtained, the MAS can solve for π∗ 

> i

such that 

lim t→∞ π(t) 

> i

= π∗ 

> i

, where π(t) 

> i

= π(t−1)  

> i

+u(t)+g(t) 

> i

, t =1, 2, . . . . The f (·) : {g1, . . . , g N } → u∗, we named the consensus operator that exists within this gradient update framework. 

Proposition 3.3 (Consensus Equilibrium as Generalized Bellman Equilibrium) . The consensus equilibrium point reached by Theorem 3.2 ( u∗ = 0) can be interpreted as a 

generalized Bellman equilibrium in cooperative MARL. At this point, no joint policy improvement direction exists that simultaneously increases the expected returns of all agents. 

From the formalization of the above problem and The-orem 3.2, central to obtaining the optimal joint policy 

{πi}∗Ni=1 now lies in finding the consensus operator f :

{g1, . . . , g N } → u∗. Through Monotonic Improvement Analysis and an examination of the stability conditions re-quired by Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem, we conclude that the u∗ output by function f must possess the following core properties: 

Condition 3.4 (Consensus Gradient Solver Operator) .

Pareto Improvement Property: u∗ must ensure a non-negative projection on local gradients gi of all agents (g⊤ 

> i

u∗ ≥ 0). Continuity: The function f must be con-tinuous with respect to the input gradients {gi}. Consensus Representation: u∗ should lie within the convex hull of all local gradients. 

In Condition 3.4, the Pareto Improvement Property guaran-3Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

tees that updating along u∗ does not harm the interests of any individual, forming the foundation for the monotonic convergence of the system. Continuity is a necessary math-ematical prerequisite for proving the existence of consensus equilibrium points using the Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem. Consensus Representation ensures u∗ is a legitimate repre-sentation of the intent of the team rather than an arbitrarily generated external vector. Crucially, in GRASP, the computation of gi depends on the current policy, necessitating that sampling data be gener-ated by the policy currently being updated. Consequently, our approach falls naturally within the on-policy learning paradigm, leading us to build upon the classic and state-of-the-art baseline, MAPPO. We formally define the GRASP framework incorporating these PPO-based update rules in Section 3.2. The subsequent sections are dedicated to the formal definition of the GRASP. Nevertheless, our method is not strictly limited to on-policy settings. In off-policy contexts, although the u∗ calculated from replay buffer data may theoretically deviate from the true optimal direction due to distribution shift, it serves as a sufficiently effective approximation to drive policy im-provement. In Appendix G, we detail the adaptation of GRASP for off-policy settings, propose a mechanism to rec-tify the estimation bias, and provide a theoretical proof of its convergence. Furthermore, we empirically validate these conclusions through comparative experiments and specific results are presented in Appendix A.1. 

3.2. GRASP 

3.2.1. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

The GRASP framework operates within the CTDE paradigm. Under this paradigm, we adopt standard defini-tions from MARL to formulate the fundamental functions. We formulate our fundamental objective using standard MARL definitions. Let πi(ai|oi; θi) denote the policy of agent i, parameterized by θi, which outputs a probability dis-tribution over action ai given the local observation oi (Sut-ton, 1988), where θi represents the policy parameters. Used to evaluate the long-term expected return of states s, the state value function is defined as: 

V (st; ϕ) ≈ V π (st) = Eπ

" ∞X

> k=0

γkrt+k | s0 = st

#

. (1) Here, γ is the discount reward factor. Note that rt repre-sents the shared reward of the team. To reduce variance and enhance training stability, we employ Generalized Advan-tage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2015b). First, we calculate the Temporal Difference (TD) (Mnih et al., 2015) error δt:

δt = rt + γV (st+1 ; ϕ) − V (st; ϕ). (2) Subsequently, the advantage function is calculated recur-sively: 

ˆAt =

> ∞

X

> l=0

(γλ )lδt+l. (3) Here, λ ∈ [0 , 1] represents the smoothing parameter of GAE. Specifically, when λ = 0 , GAE degenerates into the TD error. l denotes the time offset relative to the current time step t.3.2.2. A CTOR UPDATE VIA GRASP The actor update serves as the core component of GRASP. It determines the consensus direction via an operator satisfying Condition 3.4. Specifically, it instantiates the representative operator defined in Proposition 3.7 and approximates the aforementioned trust-region constraints utilizing the clip-ping mechanism of PPO. The process is divided into three steps. Step 1: Local Gradient Computation. Each agent first com-putes its private expected policy gradient, representing the individual optimal update direction: 

gi(θi, old ) = 

Eoi,t ,a i,t ∼πi, old 

h

∇θi log πi(ai,t |oi,t ; θi) · ˆAt

i

. (4) Step 2: Consensus Gradient Determination. To resolve gradient conflicts and identify the Pareto-optimal direction, GRASP solves for the minimum-norm vector u∗ within the Convex Hull of the local gradients of all agents: 

u∗(θold ) = argmin  

> u∈ConvexHull( g1,...,g N)

∥u∥2. (5) Step 3: Gradient Realignment and Safe Update. We inject the consensus gradient u∗ into the standard PPO update process, performing gradient ascent along v = gi + u∗, a hybrid gradient direction. First, we define the standard PPO clipped surrogate objective: 

JPPO  

> i

(θi) = Et

 min  ρt(θi) ˆAt,

clip (ρt(θi), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

 , (6) where ρt(θi) = πθi (ai,t |oi,t )  

> πθi, old (ai,t |oi,t )

is the probability ra-tio (Schulman et al., 2017). It is used to limit the step size of policy updates, preventing the policy from undergoing excessively large or drastic changes. Then, we construct the final GRASP update rule. The update direction ∆θi for parameter θi is jointly determined by the 4Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

original PPO gradient and the weighted consensus gradient 

u∗:

θi, new ← θi, old + η · ∇θi JPPO  

> i

(θi) θi=θi, old 

+ u∗

!| {z }

> Realigned Update Direction

, (7) where η is the learning rate. This can be equivalently ex-pressed as maximizing the following hybrid objective func-tion: 

θi, new = argmax 

> θi

 JPPO  

> i

(θi) + ⟨θi, u ∗⟩ . (8) 3.2.3. C RITIC UPDATE 

The objective of the critic is to approximate the value func-tion of the current policy πold . The target return ˆRt is con-structed using the estimated advantage ˆAt and the value estimate V (st; ϕ) (i.e., ˆRt = ˆAt + V (st; ϕold )). The critic then minimizes the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between its prediction and this target return, as follows: 

L(ϕ) = Et

"

max 



V (st; ϕ) − ˆRt

2

,



clip 



V (st; ϕi), V (st; ϕold ) − ε, V (st; ϕold ) + ε



− ˆRt

2!# 

.

(9) The update rule is: 

ϕi ← ϕi − η∇ϕi L(ϕ). (10) 3.2.4. C ONSTRAINT CONSISTENCY 

It is noteworthy that in practical engineering implementa-tion, both the policy and state value functions undergo multi-epoch updates on a single sampling batch. Although the consensus gradient u∗ is introduced as a bias term within the objective function, the probability ratio ρt is recom-puted based on the latest θi during each subsequent PPO epoch update. This implies that even with external gradient guidance, the PPO clip mechanism remains active, ensur-ing that the final policy update is restricted within the trust region. A detailed theoretical compatibility analysis regard-ing the trust-region constraint and the consensus direction constraint is provided in Subsection 3.3.2. The overall algo-rithm is described in Algorithm 1 in Appendix B. 

3.3. Joint Policy Functions Monotonic Improvement and Convergence under GRASP 

3.3.1. E XISTENCE OF CONSENSUS EQUILIBRIUM 

POINTS 

With the well established Kakutani Fixed-Point Theo-rem (Kakutani, 1941), we derive the following theorem to theoretically guarantee that the stable learning dynamics of GRASP possess a well-defined equilibrium point. 

Theorem 3.5 (GRASP Equilibrium Point Existence) . Sup-pose the joint policy parameter space Θ is a nonempty, compact, and convex subset of the Euclidean space RD .Then, the GRASP learning process possesses a fixed point 

θ∗ ∈ Θ that is a consensus equilibrium point. Proof. The proof proceeds by verifying that the update mapping defined by the GRASP framework satisfies the necessary conditions of the Kakutani Fixed-Point Theo-rem—specifically, the properties of upper hemi-continuity and convexity on the compact space Θ. Consequently, the existence of the consensus equilibrium point θ∗ is guaran-teed. The detailed derivation is provided in Appendix C. This resembles the state in single-agent RL where the Bell-man optimality equation holds, the policy is already optimal, and no policy change would enhance value. Thus, GRASP is a robust iterative method for finding such stable fixed points. 3.3.2. T RUST -R EGION CONSTRAINED CONSENSUS 

OPTIMIZATION 

Distinguished from standard MARL frameworks, GRASP models the multi-agent cooperative learning problem as a Trust-Region Constrained Consensus Optimization (TR-CCO) problem. In the k-th iteration, given the old policy parameters θold , GRASP aims to find a parameter update 

∆θ that maximizes alignment with the Pareto-optimal con-sensus direction u∗ while strictly remaining within the trust region to guarantee monotonic performance improvement. This is formalized as: 

max  

> ∆θ

⟨u∗(θold ), ∆θ⟩

s.t. Es∼ρπold 

DKL (πθold (·| s) || 

πθold +∆ θ (·| s))  ≤ δ. 

(11) Here, u∗(θold ) represents the optimal cooperative gradient direction, and the DKL constraint defines a safe neigh-borhood within the parameter space. Solving the KL-divergence constraint explicitly involves high-order Hes-sian computations, which are computationally expensive. Following the PPO paradigm, we relax this constraint by incorporating the standard clipped surrogate objective and injecting the consensus direction as a linear regularization 5Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

term. The unconstrained optimization problem in GRASP is thus reformulated as maximizing the following hybrid objective: 

θk+1 = argmax 

> θ

 JPPO (θ) + ⟨θ, u ∗⟩ , (12) where JPPO (θ) = Et[min( ρt(θ) ˆAt, clip( ρt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + 

ϵ) ˆAt)] denotes the standard PPO objective. This formulation fundamentally alters the gradient field by updating the parameters along a realigned trajectory guided by u∗, rather than following the naive steepest ascent direction P ∇Ji. To theoretically characterize the stability of this update, we propose the following proposition: The update rule derived from Equation (12) guarantees a dual-layer stability property termed Safe Pareto-Optimality. The consensus term u∗ ensures that the update direction lies strictly within the Pareto descent cone of the joint loss surface, effectively filtering out conflicting gradient com-ponents that would otherwise lead to oscillation. Despite the introduction of the consensus bias, the PPO clipping mechanism imposes a strict bound on the policy probability ratio ρt(θ). This guarantees that the valid update remains within the trust region intersection defined by ϵ, preserving the monotonic improvement property. 

3.4. Value Function Monotonic Improvement and Convergence under GRASP 

To formally establish the convergence of the value function under the proposed update rule, we analyze the contraction properties of the GRASP-Bellman operator. 

Proposition 3.6 (Consensus-Driven Update Mechanism) .

Let J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ [P∞ 

> t=0

γtrt] denote the joint objective function with local gradients gi = ∇θi J(θ). The GRASP update is defined as ∆θi = η(gi + u∗), where u∗ is the minimum-norm element in the convex hull of {gi}Ni=1 .Proof. The proof proceeds by analyzing the first-order ap-proximation of the joint objective function update. We first utilize the geometric properties of the minimum-norm consensus vector u∗ within the convex hull to guarantee a strictly non-negative improvement in the joint objective 

J(θ) via Taylor Expansion. Subsequently, by invoking the Policy Improvement Theorem and performing a standard recursive telescoping expansion, we establish that this local objective ascent translates into a uniform global improve-ment of the value function V (s). The detailed derivation is provided in Appendix D. The convergence of the value function within the GRASP framework is provided in Appendix E. 

3.5. Construction and Proof of the Consensus Gradient Function 

Based on the above analysis, we propose solving the QP problem of minimizing the convex combination of the gradi-ent norm (Sener & Koltun, 2018) to find u∗ as the operator 

f . Intuitively, this is geometrically equivalent to finding the vector closest to the origin within the convex hull formed by the gradients. 

Proposition 3.7 (QP Consensus Operator) . Define the func-tion f (·) as solving the following optimization problem: 

u∗ =

> N

X

> i=1

c∗ 

> i

gi, where c∗ = arg min 

> c∈∆N

12

> N

X

> i=1

cigi

> 22

and s.t. 

> N

X

> i=1

ci = 1 , ci ≥ 0. (13) 

By the definition of the optimization problem, u∗ satis-fies consensus representativeness and necessarily satis-fies Pareto improvement, i.e., for any agent j, we have 

g⊤ 

> j

u∗ ≥ ∥ u∗∥22 ≥ 0.Proof. This optimization problem is a convex quadratic pro-gramming problem with linear constraints. We can analyze the properties of its optimal solution using the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) conditions. The detailed proof process is provided in Appendix F. Through the above proof, we confirm that u∗, the solution to the QP problem, possesses a non-negative projection onto the local gradient gj for all agents. This demonstrates that u∗ constitutes a strictly defined Pareto improvement direction. Furthermore, by Berge’s Maximum Theorem, the unique solution to this convex QP problem is continuous with respect to gradients, thereby satisfying the continuity condition required for fixed-point analysis. Furthermore, the QP solver is an operator that satisfies Condition 3.4. The QP algorithm is described in Algorithm 2 in Appendix B. 

# 4. Experiment 

We evaluated GRASP in the StarCraft Multi-Agent Chal-lenge (SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019), SMACv2 (Ellis et al., 2023), and Google Research Football (GRF) (Ku-rach et al., 2020) environments. SMAC is one of the most popular MARL benchmarks, covering a wide range of coop-erative micro-control scenarios. We conducted experiments on SMAC HARD and SuperHARD scenarios. SMACv2 complements the deterministic nature of SMAC by random-izing starting positions and unit types, while also altering units’ line of sight and attack ranges. In GRF, multiple agents collaborate to play a soccer match. All experiments were run within 1 × 10 7 time steps per trial, and we report 6Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026                                                                                   

> Figure 1. Comparison of win rate learning curves between GRASP and baseline algorithms (MAPPO, HAPPO, and MA 2E) across six scenarios in SMAC and SMACv2. Solid lines represent the average win rate from multiple runs, while shaded areas indicate standard deviation.
> Table 1. Win rate comparison (Mean ±Std) on different scenarios. The best results are highlighted in bold .
> Scenario GRASP (Ours) MAPPO HAPPO MA 2E
> MMM2 0.967 ±0.031 0.717 ±0.218 0.509 ±0.168 0.839 ±0.021 3s5z vs 3s6z 0.783 ±0.360 0.619 ±0.345 0.461 ±0.232 0.027 ±0.010 5m vs 6m 0.909 ±0.044 0.815 ±0.075 0.350 ±0.321 0.372 ±0.114 Terran (10 agents) 0.467 ±0.103 0.571 ±0.000 0.233 ±0.074 0.583 ±0.057
> Protoss (10 agents) 0.563 ±0.045 0.491 ±0.094 0.250 ±0.069 0.391 ±0.054 Zerg (5 agents) 0.491 ±0.084 0.418 ±0.083 0.363 ±0.020 0.396 ±0.065

the average win rate and shadow standard error across three distinct random seeds. The experimental parameters for comparison are provided in Appendix H. 

4.1. GRASP Collaborative MARL 

First, we integrate GRASP into the MARL framework by selecting MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), the most represen-tative SOTA method among on-policy gradient methods, to form the novel GRASP-MAPPO method. We com-pare GRASP against multiple MARL algorithms, including MAPPO, HAPPO (Zhong et al., 2024), and MA 2E (Kang et al.). MAPPO and HAPPO are on-policy methods, while MA 2E is an off-policy method. We validated our approach on the most challenging scenarios of SMAC: 5m vs 6m, MMM2, and 3s5z vs 3s6z. Despite 5m vs 6m being a no-toriously difficult map, most existing algorithms still fail to achieve high win rates. We constructed three scenarios within SMACv2 to assess GRASP’s performance, adopting SMACv2 to overcome limitations SMAC’s limitations, such as a lack of randomness. Unlike SMAC, SMACv2 incorpo-rates randomly generated unit starting positions, introducing greater randomness to create challenging scenarios. Fig. 1 and Tab. 1 illustrate the performance comparison between the GRASP model and baselines, with the GRASP-MAPPO method representing our proposed approach. In the HARD and SuperHARD scenarios of SMAC, GRASP achieves higher sampling efficiency and upper bounds on win rates compared to all baselines, demonstrating a sig-nificant improvement over MAPPO. In SMACv2, although GRASP underperforms MA 2E on the 10gen terran scenario, it outperforms MA 2E across all other scenarios. Crucially, GRASP consistently outperforms MAPPO because it is a framework adaptable to all other CTDE-based MARL meth-ods. The key strength of GRASP lies in its ability to enhance baseline methods. 7Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026     

> Figure 2. Comparison of win rate learning curves between GRASP and baseline algorithms (MAPPO and MA 2E) across three scenarios in GRF. Solid lines represent the average win rate from multiple runs, while shaded areas indicate standard deviation.
> Figure 3. Comparison of win rate learning curves between GRASP and MAPPO in the Simple Spread scenario of MPE. Solid lines represent the average win rate from multiple runs, while shaded areas indicate standard deviation.

4.2. Extensibility of GRASP 

To comprehensively validate the applicability and robust-ness of the GRASP framework in complex dynamic envi-ronments, we conducted extensive experiments on the GRF platform. GRF is a physics-based, high-fidelity multi-agent simulation environment where the core winning condition is scoring a goal in the net of the opponent. Unlike traditional maze or simple particle environments, GRF features a high-dimensional state space, extremely sparse reward signals, and highly random opponent policies. This demands that agents not only possess precise individual control capabil-ities but also achieve high policy consistency to execute intricate passing and cutting coordination, making it the ideal testing ground for GRASP consensus gradients. In selecting specific scenarios to cover collaborative chal-lenges of varying difficulty and scale, we chose three repre-sentative official scenarios: Academy Counterattack Hard, Academy 3 Vs 1 With Keeper, and Academy Corner. The characteristics of these three scenarios are shown in Ap-pendix H (Tab. 7). Fig. 2 shows the win rate comparison curves of GRASP against the current SOTA method MAPPO and the exploration-focused MA 2E method. Experimental results demonstrate that, thanks to the gradient realignment mecha-nism enabled by active perception, GRASP exhibits faster convergence and higher asymptotic win rates across all sce-narios. When baseline methods stabilize and encounter suboptimal policy bottlenecks, GRASP effectively breaks through this upper bound, achieving significantly higher asymptotic win rates. This proves its capability to discover superior cooperative joint policy. Furthermore, to validate the universality of GRASP across different collaborative paradigms, we conducted additional experiments in the Multi-Agent Particle Environments (MPE) (Lowe et al., 2017) setting. Unlike the emphasis of GRF on unified objectives and sparse rewards, MPE sce-narios employ an additive reward mechanism, where the total team reward is the sum of individual rewards earned by each agent. This mechanism requires agents to strictly avoid physical collisions or mutual interference while pursuing in-dividual optimization, thereby imposing stringent demands on the conflict resolution capabilities of joint policy. Fig. 3 presents the comparison results between GRASP and MAPPO in the Simple Spread scenario. Given the wide reward value range in the early training stages of this sce-nario, a local zoom-in view is provided to more clearly illus-trate performance differences during the convergence phase. Results show that, at the same number of training steps, GRASP converges to a superior policy solution compared to MAPPO. This further validates the advantage of GRASP in handling multi-agent policy conflicts, effectively guiding the team toward more efficient, conflict-free collaboration. We provide additional validations in Appendix A.2. Specifi-cally, we challenge GRASP in the super-hard 27m vs 30m scenario of SMAC to demonstrate its scalability and robust-8Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

ness in large-scale, high-dimensional multi-agent coordi-nation tasks. Finally, Appendix A.1 provides a detailed discussion regarding the limitations of GRASP, particularly its reduced consensus efficacy when applied to off-policy methods (e.g., QMIX) due to stale transitions. 

# 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose the GRASP framework, which incorporates a novel policy update method and a property definition for the consensus gradient operator. Theoretically, we demonstrate that the proposed policy update rule, driven by consensus gradients satisfying these properties, ensures the policy evolution process meets the conditions of Kaku-tani Fixed Point Theorem. This theoretically guarantees convergence toward the generalized Bellman Equilibrium. Extensive experiments on SMAC, SMACv2, GRF, and MPE consistently show that GRASP achieves state-of-the-art per-formance with superior scalability and generality. In highly stochastic environments, increased gradient variance ex-pands the convex hull, which diminishes the magnitude of the consensus update. While this safely prevents drastic policy fluctuations, it attenuates the overall consensus gains. Future work will explore hybrid consensus operators com-bining representations and gradients for robust estimation, maintaining efficacy under extreme stochasticity. 

# 6. Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Bertsekas, D. Reinforcement learning and optimal control ,volume 1. Athena Scientific, 2019. Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. Convex optimization . Cam-bridge university press, 2004. D ´esid ´eri, J.-A. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for multiobjective optimization. Comptes Rendus Mathe-matique , 350(5-6):313–318, 2012. Ellis, B., Cook, J., Moalla, S., Samvelyan, M., Sun, M., Mahajan, A., Foerster, J. N., and Whiteson, S. Smacv2: An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-agent re-inforcement learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2212.07489 .Frank, M., Wolfe, P., et al. An algorithm for quadratic programming. Naval research logistics quarterly , 3(1-2): 95–110, 1956. Gao, Z., Yang, G., and Prorok, A. Co-optimizing reconfig-urable environments and policies for decentralized mul-tiagent navigation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 41: 4741–4760, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2025.3588449. Hernandez-Leal, P., Kartal, B., and Taylor, M. E. A survey and critique of multiagent deep reinforcement learning. 

Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , 33(6):750– 797, 2019. Jaques, N., Lazaridou, A., Hughes, E., Gulcehre, C., Ortega, P., Strouse, D., Leibo, J. Z., and De Freitas, N. Social influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 3040–3049. PMLR, 2019. Jung, W., Hong, S., Yoon, D., Lee, K., and Lim, W. Agent-centric actor-critic for asynchronous multi-agent rein-forcement learning. In Forty-second International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2025. Kakutani, S. A generalization of brouwer’s fixed point theorem. 1941. Kang, S., Lee, Y., Kim, G., Chong, S., and Yun, S.-Y. MA 2E: Addressing partial observability in multi-agent reinforce-ment learning with masked auto-encoder. In The Thir-teenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Kuba, J., Chen, R., Wen, M., Wen, Y., Sun, F., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In ICLR 2022-10th International Conference on Learning Representations , pp. 1046. The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. Kurach, K., Raichuk, A., Sta ´nczyk, P., Zajc, M., and Gelly, S. Google research football: A novel reinforcement learn-ing environment. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 34(4):4501–4510, 2020. Li, C., Liu, J., Zhang, Y., Wei, Y., Niu, Y., Yang, Y., Liu, Y., and Ouyang, W. Ace: Cooperative multi-agent q-learning with bidirectional action-dependency. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 37, pp. 8536–8544, 2023. Liu, J., Zhong, Y., Hu, S., Fu, H., FU, Q., Chang, X., and Yang, Y. Maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent rein-forcement learning. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=tmqOhBC4a5 .Lowe, R., Wu, Y. I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Pieter Abbeel, O., and Mordatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 30, 2017. 9Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-land, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature , 518(7540): 529–533, 2015. Qin, H., Liu, Z., Lin, C., Ma, C., Mei, S., Shen, S., and Wang, C. Gradps: Resolving futile neurons in parameter sharing network for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Qiu, W., Wang, X., Yu, R., He, X., and Rabinovich, Z. Rmix: Learning risk-sensitive policies for cooperative reinforcement learning agents. 2021. Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(178):1–51, 2020. Reddi, A., Tiboni, G., Peters, J., and D’Eramo, C. Recursive reasoning for sample-efficient multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=1dhL9VtBuH .Samvelyan, M., Rashid, T., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Nardelli, N., Rudner, T. G. J., Hung, C. M., Torr, P. H. S., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. 2019. Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz, P. Trust region policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1889–1897. PMLR, 2015a. Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel, P. High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 ,2015b. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Sener, O. and Koltun, V. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Sutton, R. S. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning , 3(1):9–44, 1988. Sutton, R. S., Barto, A. G., et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction , volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. Wang, X., Tian, Z., Wan, Z., Wen, Y., Wang, J., and Zhang, W. Order matters: Agent-by-agent policy optimization. In 11th International Conference on Learning Represen-tations, ICLR 2023 , pp. 1–35. ICLR, 2023. Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooper-ative multi-agent games. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24611–24624, 2022. Yu, T., Kumar, S., Gupta, A., Levine, S., Hausman, K., and Finn, C. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 5824–5836, 2020. Yu, X., Lin, Y., Wang, S., and Han, S. Improving monotonic optimization in heterogeneous multi-agent reinforcement learning with optimal marginal deterministic policy gra-dient. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks , pp. 416–429. Springer, 2025. Zhong, Y., Kuba, J. G., Feng, X., Hu, S., Ji, J., and Yang, Y. Heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(32):1–67, 2024. Zhou, S., Hou, Y., Wu, Y., Yu, X., Zhou, L., Piao, H., and Zhang, Q. Cooperative multi-agent advice exchange via topological graph learning. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems , 2025. 10 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

# A. Additional Experiment 

A.1. Transferability of GRASP  

> Figure 4. Comparison of win rate learning curves between GRASP-QMIX and QMIX across three scenarios in SMAC. Solid lines represent the average win rate from multiple runs, while shaded areas indicate standard deviation.

To validate the portability of the GRASP framework, we ported our method to other approaches. Although GRASP aims to find the consensus gradient—the most suitable for on-policy methods—because according to 3.2, the gi used to compute u∗

should be the gradient of the policy at the current time step. However, in off-policy methods, the buffer contains excessive traces from previous policies, causing the computed consensus gradient to be influenced by past policies and thus not the most precise. In this case, u degenerates into a suboptimal consensus gradient. However, even though the trajectories originate from previous policies, the current policy is still utilized when computing the TD error. Thus, the suboptimal consensus gradient can still effectively optimize off-policy methods. Consequently, we combined GRASP with several typical off-policy methods, QMIX, to demonstrate the validity of this inference. Fig. 4 demonstrates the results of GRASP combined with QMIX. As inferred from the preceding analysis, GRASP continues to enhance the effectiveness of QMIX, although the improvement is less pronounced than that observed when GRASP enhances MAPPO. 

A.2. Additional Extensibility of GRASP  

> Figure 5. Comparison of win rate learning curves between GRASP and MAPPO in 27m vs 30m scenario of MPE. Solid lines represent the average win rate from multiple runs, while shaded areas indicate standard deviation.

To validate the scalability of the GRASP framework in large-scale agent collaboration tasks, we selected the Super Hard difficulty scenario 27m vs 30m from the SMAC benchmark for experimentation. As the number of agents surges, the non-stationarity of the environment intensifies significantly, and coordinating conflicting policies among agents becomes increasingly challenging. Therefore, this scenario not only tests algorithmic performance but also pushes GRASP to its limits in extracting consensus within an extremely high-dimensional state space. Fig. 5 presents the experimental results. In this highly challenging Super Hard scenario, MAPPO has demonstrated 11 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

exceptional performance with a success rate of 94.68%. Nevertheless, GRASP achieved a significant performance break-through, ultimately raising the success rate to 96.97%. Notably, this improvement is far from negligible in the demanding 27m vs 30m scenario. It signifies that GRASP reduces the task failure rate by nearly 43% relative to the SOTA baseline. This demonstrates that the consensus mechanism of GRASP effectively corrects policy deviations, causing minor errors during large-scale agent battles. 

# B. Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 GRASP (Shared Reward / Centralized Critic) 

1: Input: Initial policy parameters θi for agents i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, global value parameters ϕ

2: Hyperparameters: Learning rate η, Clip ϵ, GAE λ, Discount γ

3: Initialize θi, old ← θi for all i

4: for iteration k = 1 , 2, . . . do 

5: // Phase 1: Data Collection & Global GAE 

6: Collect trajectory batch D by running πold for T timesteps 

7: Compute global value targets ˆRt and advantages ˆAt using GAE (γ, λ ) based on shared reward rt and V (st; ϕ)

8: // Phase 2: Consensus Gradient Determination 

9: for each agent i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } do 

10: Compute local gradient on batch D using global ˆAt:

11: gi ← ED

h

∇θi log πi(ai,t |oi,t ; θi, old ) · ˆAt

i

12: end for 

13: Solve QP for Pareto-optimal consensus direction: 

14: u∗ ← argmin u∈ConvexHull( {g1,...,g N }) ∥u∥2

15: // Phase 3: Proximal Optimization Loop 

16: for epoch e = 1 to K do 

17: Shuffle D and partition into mini-batches 

18: for each mini-batch B ⊂ D do 

19: // 1. Global Critic Update 

20: L(ϕ) ← 1

> |B|

P

> t∈B

(V (st; ϕ) − ˆRt)2

21: ϕ ← ϕ − ηcritic ∇ϕL(ϕ)

22: // 2. Multi-Agent Actor Update 

23: for each agent i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } do 

24: Calculate ratio ρt(θi) and surrogate JPPO  

> i

(θi) using global ˆAt

25: Compute hybrid gradient: ∆θi ← ∇ θi JPPO  

> i

+ u∗

26: θi ← θi + η · ∆θi

27: end for 

28: end for 

29: end for 

30: Update old policies: θi, old ← θi for all i

31: end for 

12 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Algorithm 2 SolveConsensusQP: Solving Consensus Gradient via Quadratic Programming  

> 1:

Input: Set of local gradients G = {g1, g 2, . . . , g N } 

> 2:

Output: Consensus gradient u∗, Mixing coefficients c∗ 

> 3:

Construct QP Matrices:  

> 4:

Let objective function be f (c) = 12 ∥ PNi=1 cigi∥22 = 12 c⊤Pc  

> 5:

Compute Gram Matrix P ∈ RN ×N where:  

> 6:

Pij = g⊤ 

> i

gj {Dot product of gradients } 

> 7:

Define Constraints:  

> 8:

Equality: P ci = 1 = ⇒ 1⊤c = 1  

> 9:

Inequality: ci ≥ 0 = ⇒ Ic ≥ 0 

> 10:

Solve Standard QP:  

> 11:

Find c∗ = [ c∗

> 1

, . . . , c ∗ 

> N

]⊤ that minimizes:  

> 12:

min c 12 c⊤Pc  

> 13:

s.t. Aeq c = beq (where Aeq = 1⊤, beq = 1 ) 

> 14:

Ain c ≥ bin (where Ain = I, bin = 0) 

> 15:

Compute Consensus Gradient:  

> 16:

u∗ ← PNi=1 c∗ 

> i

gi 

> 17:

return u∗, c∗

# C. Proof of the Theorem 3.5 

To apply the Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem, we define the GRASP update operator as: 

TGRASP (θ) = {θ + η (g(θ) + u∗(θ)) } . (14) Specifically, u∗ is computed by any operator satisfying the conditions in Condition 3.4. While these general properties suffice for an existence proof, to ensure theoretical consistency with our practical implementation, we employ the specific operator instantiation used in our algorithm for the derivation. The detailed definition and property verification of this operator are provided in Proposition 3.7. Therefore, u∗(θ) = argmin u∈H (θ) ∥u∥2, and H(θ) denotes the convex hull of local gradients. We verify that TGRASP satisfies the three necessary conditions: (1) Non-emptiness, (2) Convexity, and (3) Closed Graph property. 1. Non-emptiness, we first establish that the consensus gradient u∗ always exists. The local gradients are defined as 

gi(θ) = E[∇θi log πi · Aπθ 

> i

]. The advantage Aπθ 

> i

depends on the state value function V πθ , which is updated by minimizing the TD error: 

δi(t) = ri(t) + γV i(st+1 ; ϕ) − Vi(st; ϕ). (15) Since the discount factor satisfies γ ∈ [0 , 1) and rewards are bounded ( |ri| ≤ Rmax ), the Bellman operator acts as a contraction mapping. This guarantees that the value estimates are strictly bounded: 

|V πθ (s)| ≤ Rmax 

1 − γ < ∞. (16) Consequently, the local gradients gi(θ) are finite for all θ ∈ Θ. The convex hull H(θ) generated by these finite gradients is a compact set. By the Weierstrass Theorem, the continuous objective function ∥u∥2 achieves a minimum over this compact set, ensuring u∗ exists and TGRASP (θ)̸ = ∅.2. Convexity, we next examine the convexity of the image of the operator. The consensus gradient is the solution to the QP problem: 

min  

> u

∥u∥2 s.t. u ∈ H (θ). (17) Since the squared Euclidean norm f (u) = ∥u∥2 is a strictly convex function, and the constraint set H(θ) is convex, the minimizer u∗ is unique. A set containing a single element (a singleton) is trivially convex. Thus, for any θ, the set TGRASP (θ)

is convex. 3. Closed Graph, finally, we demonstrate that the operator has a closed graph. Given that TGRASP is single-valued, this is equivalent to proving continuity. Continuity of Constraints: Since πθ is continuously differentiable, the mapping from 13 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

parameters θ to the set of local gradients {gi(θ)} is continuous. Consequently, the correspondence θ 7 → H (θ) is continuous. Berge’s Maximum Theorem: For the optimization problem min ∥u∥2 s.t. u ∈ H (θ), since the objective is continuous and the constraint correspondence is continuous, the theorem states that the solution mapping is upper hemi-continuous. Continuity of Solution: Coupled with the uniqueness of u∗, upper hemi-continuity implies that u∗(θ) is a continuous function of θ.Since the update rule is a linear combination of continuous functions: 

θ′ = θ + η(g(θ) + u∗(θ)) . (18) In summary, the operator TGRASP is continuous. The operator TGRASP satisfies all conditions of the Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem. Therefore, there exists a fixed point 

θ∗ ∈ Θ such that θ∗ = TGRASP (θ∗), proving the reachability of the generalized Bellman equilibrium. Since θ is nonempty, compact, and convex, and Φ satisfies the required conditions, Kakutani Fixed-Point Theorem guarantees the existence of a fixed point θ∗ ∈ θ such that θ∗ ∈ Φ( θ∗). By the definition of Φ, this implies: 

θ∗ = θ∗ + ηv (θ∗) = ⇒ v(θ∗) = 0. (19) This implies that for all i, vi(θ∗) = gi(θ∗) + u∗(θ∗) = 0, i.e., gi(θ∗) = −u∗(θ∗). Substituting this relation into the definition of u∗ yields: u∗(θ∗) = P c∗ 

> i

(−u∗(θ∗)) = −(P c∗ 

> i

)u∗(θ∗) = −u∗(θ∗), which holds only when u∗(θ∗) = 0.Therefore, this fixed point is a consensus equilibrium point with zero consensus gradient. 

# D. Proof of Value Function Convergence and Monotonic Improvement 

In this section, we provide the detailed proof for the monotonic policy improvement and value function convergence under the GRASP framework, as outlined in Section 3.4. 

Objective Improvement via Taylor Expansion and Convex Geometry : We first analyze the change in the objective function J(θ) induced by the parameter update. According to the definition of the First-Order Taylor Expansion, for a smooth function J(θ), the value at the updated parameter θnew = θold + ∆ θ can be approximated as: 

J(θnew ) = J(θold ) + 

> N

X

> i=1

⟨∇ θi J(θ), ∆θi⟩ + o(∥∆θ∥2). (20) Substituting the GRASP update rule ∆θi = η(gi + u∗) into the linear term, the increment ∆J is given by: 

∆J ≈

> N

X

> i=1

⟨gi, η (gi + u∗)⟩ = η

> N

X

> i=1

∥gi∥2 + η

> N

X

> i=1

⟨gi, u ∗⟩. (21) To analyze the sign of the second term, we invoke the fundamental property of the minimum-norm point in a convex hull, as established in the Frank-Wolfe algorithm and Multi-Gradient Descent literature (D´ esid´ eri, 2012; Frank et al., 1956). Since η > 0, the GRASP update guarantees a strictly non-negative improvement in the joint objective, surpassing the gain of standard independent updates by the margin of the consensus term ηN ∥u∗∥2.

Value Function Convergence via Policy Improvement Theorem: Having established that the joint objective (expected return) increases, we now demonstrate that this leads to a uniform improvement in the value function V (s). We rely on the Policy Improvement Theorem (Bertsekas, 2019; Sutton et al., 1998). Since the update direction aligns with the ascent direction of the objective J(θ), the new policy πnew improves the expected action value over the old policy πold locally: 

Qπold (s, π new (s)) ≥ V πold (s), ∀s. (22) To prove that this local improvement translates to the global value function V πnew (s), we perform the standard recursive 14 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

expansion (telescoping argument). Starting from the definition of the value function: 

V πold (s) ≤ Qπold (s, π new (s)) = Ea∼πnew ,s ′∼P [r(s, a ) + γV πold (s′)] 

≤ Ea∼πnew ,s ′∼P [r(s, a ) + γQ πold (s′, π new (s′))] = Eτ ∼πnew 

rt + γr t+1 + γ2V πold (st+2 )

≤ Eτ ∼πnew 

" ∞X

> k=0

γkrt+k

#

= V πnew (s).

(23) The derivation confirms that V πnew (s) ≥ V πold (s) for all s. Consequently, the standard Critic, which minimizes the Temporal Difference (TD) error against the returns generated by πnew , will naturally converge to the higher value estimates V πnew (s).

# E. Convergence of Value Function Estimates under GRASP 

Theorem E.1. Let T π be the standard Bellman evaluation operator for a policy π. Under the GRASP framework, the Critic update converges to a unique fixed point V πnew , and the sequence of value functions generated by iterative GRASP updates satisfies the monotonicity property: V πk+1 (s) ≥ V πk (s).Proof. 1. Contraction Property of the Standard Bellman Operator. First, we establish that for any fixed policy π (including the GRASP-updated policy πnew ), the Critic update is a contraction mapping. The standard Bellman operator T π is defined as: 

(T π V )( s) = r(s, π (s)) + γ X

> s′

P(s′|s, π (s)) V (s′). (24) For any two value functions V and V ′, and for any state s:

|(T π V )( s) − (T π V ′)( s)| = γ X

> s′

P(s′|s, π (s))( V (s′) − V ′(s′)) 

≤ γ X

> s′

P(s′|s, π (s)) ∥V − V ′∥∞

= γ∥V − V ′∥∞.

(25) Since the discount factor γ ∈ [0 , 1) , T π is a γ-contraction under the max-norm. By the Banach Fixed-Point Theorem, the Critic update iteratively converges to a unique fixed point V π , which is the true value of policy π.Shift of the Fixed Point via GRASP. The core contribution of GRASP is not modifying the operator T , but shifting the fixed point to a superior position.Let πk be the policy at iteration k, and πk+1 be the policy updated via GRASP: 

πk+1 ← πk + η(g + u∗). From Proposition 3.6 (Monotonic Policy Improvement), we established that ∆J ≥ 0, which implies local improvement in the action-value function: 

Qπk (s, π k+1 (s)) ≥ V πk (s). (26) Consider the Bellman operator for the new policy, T πk+1 . Applying this operator to the old value function V πk :

(T πk+1 V πk )( s) = Ea∼πk+1 [r + γV πk (s′)] = Qπk (s, π k+1 (s)) 

≥ V πk (s) .

(27) This inequality (T πk+1 V πk ) ≥ V πk is the condition for Monotonicity in Policy Iteration. By repeatedly applying the operator T πk+1 , the value estimates strictly increase (or stay constant at optimality) until converging to the new fixed point: 

V πk+1 = lim 

> n→∞

(T πk+1 )nV πk ≥ V πk . (28) 15 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Conclusion: The GRASP framework ensures convergence in two steps: Actor Step: The gradient realignment guarantees a transition from πk to a strictly better policy πk+1 . Critic Step: The standard Bellman update, acting as a contraction operator, converges to the true value V πk+1 . Due to the monotonic nature of the policy update, the sequence of fixed points is non-decreasing: V π0 ≤ V π1 ≤ · · · ≤ V ∗, ensuring stable convergence toward the optimal cooperative equilibrium. ■

Remark on Implicit Convergence: Unlike methods that artificially alter the target of Critic (e.g., modifying rewards or adding regularization terms), GRASP relies on implicit synchronization. The Consensus Module actively realigns the Actor to produce higher-quality trajectories (higher returns R). The Critic, observing these improved returns, naturally adjusts its value estimates V (s) upwards through the standard Bellman contraction. This separation of concerns, Actor handling the Direction of Improvement and Critic handling the Evaluation of Reality, ensures that the algorithm retains the stability guarantees of standard PPO while enjoying the accelerated convergence provided by consensus. 

# F. Proof that QP satisfies the properties of the Condition 3.4 

1) Constructing the Lagrange Function Let the objective function be the squared distance from the origin to the convex combination point. Introduce the Lagrange multiplier λ (corresponding to the equality constraint P ci = 1 ) and μ = [ μ1, . . . , μ N ]⊤ (corresponding to the inequality constraint ci ≥ 0): 

L(c, λ, μ) = 12

> N

X

> i=1

cigi

> 22

− λ

> N

X

> i=1

ci − 1

!

−

> N

X

> i=1

μici. (29) 2) Using the KKT conditions At the optimal solution c∗, the partial derivative with respect to each component cj must be zero: 

∂L

∂c j

=

> N

X

> i=1

c∗ 

> i

gi

!⊤

gj − λ − μj = 0 . (30) Since u∗ = PNi=1 c∗ 

> i

gi, the above equation can be rewritten as: 

u∗T gj = λ + μj ∀j ∈ { 1, . . . , N }. (31) 3) Solve for the dual variable λ

Multiply both sides of (Eq. 31) by c∗ 

> j

and sum over all j:

> N

X

> j=1

c∗ 

> j

(u∗T gj ) = 

> N

X

> j=1

c∗ 

> j

λ +

> N

X

> j=1

c∗ 

> j

μj . (32) Left-hand side: P c∗ 

> j

(u∗T gj ) = u∗T (P c∗ 

> j

gj ) = u∗T u∗ = ∥u∗∥22.Right-hand side: Since P c∗ 

> j

= 1 (Proposition 3.7) and c∗ 

> j

μj = 0 (complementary slackness), the right-hand side simplifies to λ · 1 + 0 = λ.Thus, we derive a crucial geometric property: the dual variable λ precisely equals the square of the consensus gradient norm. 

λ = ∥u∗∥22. (33) 4) Verifying the Pareto Property Substituting λ = ∥u∗∥22 back into (Eq. 31): 

g⊤ 

> j

u∗ = ∥u∗∥22 + μj . (34) By the dual feasibility constraint, the multiplier μj must be nonnegative ( μj ≥ 0). Therefore: 

g⊤ 

> j

u∗ ≥ ∥ u∗∥22. (35) 16 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Since the square of a norm is always non-negative ( |u∗∥22 ≥ 0), we ultimately prove that: 

g⊤ 

> j

u∗ ≥ 0. (36) 5) Generalized Bellman Equilibrium When training approaches stability, if the system reaches a fixed point, according to Theorem 3.5: The update step becomes 0, i.e., vi(θ∗) = 0 . This implies gi(θ∗) = −u∗(θ∗). Substituting this into the definition of u∗ yields: u∗ = P c∗ 

> i

(−u∗) = 

−(P c∗ 

> i

)u∗ = −u∗. The only possible case where this equation holds is u∗ = 0 *. 

# G. Off-policy Methods within GRASP 

G.1. Geometrically Aligned Update Rules 

To ensure stability in off-policy methods, we introduce a Geometrically Aligned Factor Γi that imposes an intrinsic trust-region constraint directly on the update magnitude. This factor serves as the primary stability mechanism by strictly bounding policy shifts in single-step update paradigms. This ensures that the active gradient realignment does not violate the monotonicity assumption of the policy improvement theorem, effectively marrying the stability of trust region methods with the coordination efficiency of game-theoretic consensus. Instead of relying on heuristic step-size clipping, we reconstruct the proactive update vector vi using a geometrically-driven scaling mechanism defined as follows: 

vi = Γ i(gi + u∗), (37) where Γi is the Geometrically Aligned Factor . Grounded in trust-region principles, Γi adaptively scales the update magnitude based on the resonance between individual and collective gradients: 

Γi = ∥u∗∥2 + ⟨gi, u ∗⟩∥gi∥2 + ∥u∗∥2 . (38) This formulation offers several theoretical advantages: • Intrinsic Trust-Region Constraint : The factor Γi effectively acts as a dynamic damping term. As proven in Theorem 3.5, ⟨gi, u ∗⟩ ≥ 0, which ensures Γi ∈ [0 , 1] . This naturally keeps the update within a safe proximity of the current policy parameters. • Parameter-Free Adaptation : Unlike traditional clipping methods that require a predefined threshold, the magnitude of vi is entirely determined by the relative geometry of the gradient space, enhancing the robustness of the optimization process. 

G.2. Proof of Stability and Consistency 

Next, we prove that under these derived constraints, the GRASP update is stable. 

Proposition G.1 (Stability and Consistency) . For each agent i, the constrained GRASP update direction ˜vi satisfies two key properties: 1. Individual Improvement: g⊤ 

> i

˜vi ≥ 0. Ensure that no agent is harmed during the learning process. 2. Collective Coherence: (u∗)⊤ ˜vi ≥ 0. Ensure that individual updates never deviate from the consensus update direction of the team. Proof. Property 1 (Individual Improvement): Substituting the resonance update rule vi = Γ i(gi + u∗) into the inner product with the individual gradient gi:

⟨gi, v i⟩ = Γ i⟨gi, g i + u∗⟩ = Γ i(|gi|2 + ⟨gi, u ∗⟩). (39) According to the Incentive Compatibility proven in Proposition 3.7, the consensus direction u∗ satisfies ⟨gi, u ∗⟩ ≥ 0 for all 

i. Furthermore, the Geometrically Aligned Factor Γi, derived from trust-region considerations, is defined as: 

Γi = |u∗|2+ < g i, u ∗ >

|gi|2 + |u∗|2 . (40) 17 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Since |u∗|2 ≥ 0 and ⟨gi, u ∗⟩ ≥ 0, the numerator of Γi is non-negative, and the denominator is strictly positive (unless 

gi = u∗ = 0 ), ensuring Γi ≥ 0. Consequently: 

⟨gi, v i⟩ = Γi

|{z} 

> ≥0

(|gi|2

|{z} 

> ≥0

+ ⟨gi, u ∗⟩

| {z }

> ≥0

) ≥ 0. (41) This confirms that the update direction vi is a descent direction for the individual cost (or an ascent direction for the reward), maintaining the individual rationality within the trust region. 

Property 2 (Collective Consistency): Similarly, for the consensus direction u∗:

⟨u∗, v i⟩ = Γ i⟨u∗, g i + u∗⟩ = Γ i(|u∗|2 + ⟨gi, u ∗⟩). (42) By the same non-negativity of Γi and ⟨gi, u ∗⟩, we have: 

⟨u∗, v i⟩ ≥ 0. (43) This establishes that the individual update vi never opposes the collective intent u∗, ensuring the coherence of the multi-agent system during the optimization process. 

Remark G.2 . The above process demonstrates that GRASP successfully decouples individual rationality from collective stability. Agents are free to follow their own gradients, but these gradients are regularized by a consensus term. This ensures alignment with team interests and prevents the disruptive oscillations commonly observed among independent learners. 18 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

# H. Parameters for the Comparative Experiment 

In this section, we provide detailed hyperparameter settings for each algorithm and experimental scenario. Table 2 presents a comparison of the general hyperparameters among the proposed GRASP, MA 2E, and baseline algorithms (MAPPO and HAPPO). It is observed that most baselines maintain consistency in the learning rate ( 5 × 10 −4) and the choice of optimizer to ensure a fair comparison. Notably, MA 2E employs a larger buffer size (5000) while integrating a QMIX mixing network, reflecting its unique mechanism for handling long-sequence data. Table 6 further details the specific internal parameters of the MA 2E model. Based on the Transformer architecture, the model is configured with 3 encoder layers and 2 decoder layers, supported by a 4-head attention mechanism. Furthermore, the settings for fine-tuning steps (500) and the pre-training threshold (0.015) are designed to balance representation learning on large-scale data with rapid transferability in specific scenarios.                                                                                

> Table 2. Hyperparameter settings for GRASP, MAPPO, HAPPO, and MA 2E. Hyperparameter GRASP MAPPO HAPPO MA 2EGRASP+QMIX QMIX Learning Rate 5×10 −45×10 −45×10 −41×10 −31×10 −31×10 −3
> Optimizer Adam Adam Adam Adam Adam Adam PPO Epochs 5 – 10 5 – 10 5N/A N/A N/A Mini-batch Size 1 – 2 1 – 2 132 32 32 Gamma ( γ)0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 Buffer size 64 64 64 5000 5000 5000 Policy Update (episode) 200 200 200 1000 200 200 ValueNorm True True True N/A N/A N/A Mixing Network N/A N/A N/A QMIX QMIX QMIX Consensus Operator QP None None None None None

We employ a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture for the policy of the agent and value approximation. Specifically, the network consists of three components: (1) a linear input layer that encodes the raw observation into a latent embedding; (2) a hidden layer utilizing a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) with a hidden state size of 64, followed by a ReLU activation function to capture temporal dependencies; and (3) a linear output layer that projects the hidden features to the action space. The detailed network hyperparameters are listed in Table 3. Table 4 and Table 5 present the detailed hyperparameter  

> Table 3. Agent Network Architecture Hyperparameters.

Component Layer Type Hidden Units Activation 

Input Encoder Full Connect Linear 64 -Recurrent Layer GRU 64 ReLU Output Head Full Connect Linear Adim -  

> Note: Adim denotes the dimension of the action space. The input dimension corresponds to the individual partial observation dimension
> Odim .

configurations for the Centralized Critic and the Mixing Network, respectively. The Centralized Critic (Table 4) utilizes a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) architecture to estimate the global state value, comprising two hidden layers with 64 units each and ReLU activation. The Mixing Network (Table 5), following the QMIX paradigm, employs a hypernetwork-based structure. It maps the global state to the weights of the mixing layers, using a mixing embedding dimension of 32 to enforce the monotonicity constraint between individual agent utilities and the joint value. Furthermore, we would like to clarify the network architecture design in GRASP. The policy networks of agents utilize a hybrid architecture: the feature representation backbone is shared across agents, while the specific policy heads remain independent. This design improves sample efficiency through collective experience while simplifying the computation of individual policy gradients gi. However, GRASP is equally applicable to fully parameter-sharing methods. In a fully shared architecture, individual gradients can still be derived by leveraging the correlation of the input data. Specifically, by setting the input tensors to require gradients, we can compute the independent gradient of the total loss with respect to each agent’s specific input slice ( gi = ∇input i L). While theoretically sound, this approach is computationally expensive and complex to implement. As shown in Listing 1, it requires manually managing leaf tensors and retaining computation graphs during backpropagation for each agent. 19 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026      

> Listing 1. Pseudo-code for computing independent gradients in a fully shared architecture.
> inputs.requires_grad =True g_i =torch.autograd.grad( outputs=loss, inputs=inputs[agent_id], retain_graph=True )[0]

This repeated graph retention ( retain graph=True ) significantly inflates memory overhead and training time. Therefore, we adopted the hybrid architecture to perfectly balance computational efficiency and consensus performance.  

> Table 4. Centralized Critic Network Architecture.

Layer Type Hidden Units Activation 

Input Full Connect Linear 64 ReLU Hidden 1 Full Connect Linear 64 ReLU Hidden 2 Full Connect Linear 64 ReLU Output Full Connect Linear 1 -   

> Note: The input dimension corresponds to the global state dimension Sdim .
> Table 5. Mixing Network and Hypernetwork Architecture.

Component Layer Type Output Dim Activation 

Mixing Network (Inputs: N Agent Q-values) 

Mixing Layer 1 Full Connect Linear 32 ELU Mixing Output Full Connect Linear 1 -

Hypernetworks (Input: Global State S)

Hyper-Input Full Connect Linear 64 ReLU Hyper-Weight 1 Full Connect Linear N × 32 Abs Hyper-Weight 2 Full Connect Linear 32 × 1 Abs Hyper-Bias Full Connect Linear 32 / 1 -    

> Note: Ndenotes the number of agents. Weights are generated dynamically by the Hypernetworks based on the state S.
> Table 6. The hyperparameter settings for MA 2E

Hyperparameters Value Batch size 32 Input embedding 24 The number of heads 4The number of encoder layers 3The number of decoder layers 2Steps for fine-tuning 500 Pretraining threshold 0.015 Table 7 enumerates the characteristics of the selected GRF scenarios. We have carefully chosen tasks of varying scales: ranging from Academy 3 Vs 1 With Keeper (3 agents), which focuses on local coordination and precise passing, to Academy Counterattack Hard (4 agents), which involves high-speed dynamic decision-making, and finally Academy Corner (11 agents), which tests the scalability of algorithms in a massive state space. As shown in Table 8, our evaluation covers various classic maps ranging from Hard to Super Hard difficulty. Each scenario is governed by a strict Step Limit (e.g., 70 steps for 5m vs 6m and 180 steps for MMM2), requiring agents to complete the objective of defeating enemies within a constrained time budget. 20 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

Table 7. Characteristics of the Selected Google Research Football Scenarios. These scenarios were chosen to evaluate the GRASP framework across varying levels of difficulty, agent scale, and tactical requirements.        

> Scenario Name Scale Description Key Challenges Testing Focus Academy Counterattack Hard Small (4 Agents) Rapid transition from defense to offense at high speed. High Dynamics, Split-second Decision Making Responsiveness, Dynamic Control
> Academy 3 Vs 1 With Keeper Small (3 Agents) Exploiting numerical advantage to dismantle defense. Local Coordination, Spatial Reasoning Tactical Cooperation, Precise Passing
> Academy Corner Large (11 Agents) Full-team corner kick situation with crowded penalty area. Massive State Space, Occlusion & Collisions Scalability, Consensus in Noise

Table 8. Detailed configurations for SMAC and SMACv2 scenarios. Scenario Ally Units Enemy Units Difficulty Step Limit 

SMAC 

5m vs 6m 5 Marines 6 Marines Hard 70 MMM2 10 Units 1 12 Units 2 Super Hard 180 3s5z vs 3s6z 8 Units 3 9 Units 4 Hard 170 27m vs 30m 27 Marines 30 Marines Super Hard 180 8m vs 9m 8 Marines 9 Marines Hard 120 

SMACv2 

Terran 10v10 10 Units 10 Units — 200 Protoss 10v10 10 Units 10 Units — 200 Zerg 5v5 5 Units 5 Units — 200 

Table 9. Configurations for Google Football and MPE scenarios. Scenario Ally Agents Step Limit Reward Type 

Google Football 

Counterattack Hard 4 400 Team collaboration provides 3 Vs 1 with Keeper 3 400 Team collaboration provides Academy Corner 10 400 Team collaboration provides 

MPE 

Simple Spread 3 25 Individual rewards are consolidated into team rewards 

Table 9 summarizes the configurations for GRF and the MPE. In GRF, the step limit for all scenarios is uniformly set to 400 steps with a team-based reward mechanism. In contrast, the Simple Spread task in MPE has a limit of only 25 steps, focusing on the ability of agents to achieve collaborative coverage within an extremely short horizon. 

Table 10. Hardware and Software Configurations for the Training Environment. 

Component Configuration Detail CPU Model 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-13400 CPU Architecture x86 64 (10 Cores, 16 Threads) CPU Max Frequency 4.60 GHz GPU Model NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU Memory 24564 MiB (24 GB GDDR6X) Driver Version 535.183.01 CUDA Version 12.2 To evaluate the algorithmic performance in a high-performance computing environment, all experiments were conducted on a hardware platform equipped with professional-grade GPUs. Table 10 details the hardware and software configurations used in this study. We utilized a 13th Gen Intel Core i5-13400 processor as the central computing unit, whose architecture of 10 cores and 16 threads efficiently handles parallel sampling tasks in multi-agent environments. The experiments leveraged an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, featuring 24 GB of VRAM and 16,384 CUDA cores, providing robust computational 21 Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2026 

support for the rapid iteration of deep neural networks. Furthermore, the system operates under CUDA 12.2, ensuring high-efficiency parallelism for deep learning frameworks during the gradient updates of MAPPO or MA 2E. 22