Title: Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01293v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:29:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

Jie-Jing Shao 1 2 Haiyan Yin 2 Yueming Lyu 2 Xingrui Yu 2 Lan-Zhe Guo 1 3 

Ivor W. Tsang 2 James T. Kwok 4 Yu-Feng Li 1 5 

Abstract 

Foundation model-driven agents often struggle with long-horizon planning due to the transient na-ture of purely prompting-based reasoning. While existing skill induction methods mitigate this by distilling experience into state-blind parameter-ized scripts, they fail to capture the conditional logic required for robust execution in dynamic environments. In this paper, we propose Neuro-Symbolic Skill Induction (NSI), a framework that lifts interaction traces into modular, logic-grounded programs. By synthesizing explicit con-trol flows and dynamic variable binding, NSI em-powers agents to discover when and why to act. This paradigm enables the efficient generalization, allowing agents to induce skills from few-shot examples and flexibly adapt to unseen goals. Ex-periments on a series of agentic tasks demonstrate that NSI consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, empowering agents to self-evolve into architects of logic-grounded skills. 

1. Introduction 

The rapid progress of large language models (LLMs)has empowered agentic systems to perceive, reason, and act in complex environments (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023; Jimenez et al., 2024). However, general-purpose foundation models often lack grounded knowledge for specific real-world domains. Consequently, they exhibit domain-specific 

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2Centre for Frontier AI Research, and Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 3School of Intelligence Science and Tech-nology, Nanjing University, China 4Department of Computer Sci-ence and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Tech-nology, China 5School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Univer-sity, China. Correspondence to: Haiyan Yin <yin haiyan@cfar.a-star.edu.sg >, Yu-Feng Li <liyf@nju.edu.cn >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). Open( Fridge )    

> Skill
> Induction
> Pick (Apple )
> Previous Action Trajectory
> Induction
> Our Logic-Grounded Induction
> Failed
> Has (Apple )?Pick (Apple )
> Yes
> No
> Goto (…)
> Execution Logic
> goto(fridge) open(fridge) pick(apple)
> goto(fridge) open(fridge)

Figure 1. From Trace Scripts to Logic-Grounded Programs. 

Existing methods induce skills as state-blind parameterized scripts, often failing when environmental deviations occur. In contrast, 

NSI lifts traces into logic-grounded workflows. By explicitly synthesizing state predicates and control flow (e.g., branching logic), our framework empowers agents to improve generalization. 

reasoning gaps, leading to unreliable tool use and failures in long-horizon planning (Zhang et al., 2025c; Jiang et al., 2025). These limitations highlight that static pre-trained models are insufficient. Instead, an agentic system must self-evolve through environmental interaction to bridge the gap between general capabilities and task requirements. A representative paradigm for such evolution is skill in-duction (Wang et al., 2025c;b). Unlike episodic-memory-based evolution (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b) that relies on textual retrieval to a laborious process of re-reasoning, skill induction leverages the interactive nature of agentic tasks to extract reusable, executable procedures. The learned skills expand the action space with high-level skills that can be directly invoked without re-planning (Wang et al., 2025b; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yu et al., 2025). This process mirrors the cognitive transition from System-2 to System-1: by consolidating deliberate reasoning chains into fast, reflexive “muscle memory” (skills), agents effectively internalize experience as an executable ability (Anderson, 1982; Singley & Anderson, 1989). However, current meth-ods typically induce skills as parameterized scripts (e.g., Open(Receptacle) → Pick(Object) ). These induced skills produce state-blindly actions, and thus struggle to faithfully represent the underlying execution logic. As shown in Fig. 1, after Open(Fridge) , the ideal execution logic is to check if 1

> arXiv:2605.01293v1 [cs.AI] 2 May 2026 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks

the desirable object, ‘apple’, is present. If so, dynamically bind it to Pick(Object) ; if not, branch to search elsewhere. In this paper, we propose NSI, a neuro-symbolic skill induc-tion framework that bridges this gap by redefining skills as modular, logic-grounded programs. NSI employs a trace-to-logic lifting mechanism that abstracts raw interaction his-tories into control workflows, where actions are produced by explicit symbolic predicates. By modularizing execution logic and enabling dynamic variable binding, NSI empow-ers agents to transcend rigid script memorization. This paradigm shift enables the self-evolution to robustly adapt to the environments with varying topologies and recursive complexities. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

Logic-Grounded Modular Representation. We propose a neuro-symbolic representation that decouples neural per-ception from symbolic execution. Unlike state-blind scripts, our skills invent explicit control flows and dynamic variable bindings grounded in First-Order Logic, enabling rigorous state-awareness and modular composition. 

Trace-to-Logic Induction Framework. We introduce a framework that lifts instances into generalized programs. Guided by an empirical consistency objective, it progres-sively consolidates local experts into global skills via itera-tive refinement, maximizing the empirical coverage. 

Continuous Self-Evolution via Reflective Planning. We introduce a mechanism converting runtime failures into skill honing. By grafting successful recovery trajectories onto failure nodes, agents continuously “grow” their skill graphs. This turns transient errors into permanent capabilities, yield-ing state-of-the-art performance across diverse benchmarks. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Skill Discovery in Traditional RL 

Learning specialized skills for sequential decision-making tasks has been developing for a long time in traditional reinforcement learning (RL). They introduce the skills or options (Sutton et al., 1999) to enable temporal abstraction by encapsulating primitive actions into reusable, tempo-rally extended behaviors, and enhancing policy generaliza-tion (Pertsch et al., 2021; Nam et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023). However, these methods face significant challenges when applied to foundation model-driven agents. First, the learned skills are typically black-box neural policies, which are in-compatible with the interpretable, text-based reasoning of LLMs. Second, they rely on extensive parameter optimiza-tion, which is impractical for large-scale foundation models due to sample inefficiency and high computational cost. 

2.2. Programmatic Skill Induction in the LLM Era 

Programmatic Skill Induction has emerged as a promis-ing paradigm for the evolution of foundation model-driven agents. Unlike neural parameters which are opaque and computationally expensive to update, it abstract the reusable produce from the experience (Wang et al., 2025c) and orga-nize the sequential actions into the executable skills (Wang et al., 2025b; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yu et al., 2025). In this paradigm, programs (codes) serve as a natural representation that is both synthesizable and understandable by foundation models. This seamless alignment with the generative ca-pabilities of LLMs transforms programs into a functional medium for skill induction and execution. This alignment enables agents to accumulate experience and evolve capabil-ities from the abstraction and induction. Neverthless, with-out explicit logical grounding, parameterized scripts risk becoming brittle “shortcuts” that fail when environmental change, highlighting the need for a logic-aware induction. 

2.3. Automated Agentic Workflow Generation 

This work is closely aligned with the emerging field of Agen-tic Workflow Generation (Zhang et al., 2025b; Qiao et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a), which aims to automate the con-struction and optimization of structured reasoning graphs. We adopt the paradigm of modular workflow representation, leveraging evolutionary mechanisms to induce and refine skill structures (Hu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a; Shang et al., 2025; Niu et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025b). Unlike existing approaches that typically organize predefined rea-soning nodes (e.g., Debate, Ensemble) and focus on prompt or topological optimization, we introduce a fundamental shift towards logic-grounded skill induction. Our method in-vents control nodes and variable-binding nodes to organize primitive action nodes, fundamentally determining “When” 

and “Why” based on state grounding. By thus compiling experiences into executable skills, we empower agents to construct rigorous cognitive architectures, advancing the paradigm towards autonomous logic discovery. 

3. Preliminaries 

Problem Formulation. Following (Wang et al., 2025b; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yu et al., 2025), we define the goal-conditioned POMDP planning problem fromulation M =(S, S+, A, T , G), with raw state space S+, observation space S, actions ( a ∈ A ), transition function T : S × A → S and goal g ∈ G . Following (Xu et al., 2019; Garrett et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2025), we focus on object-centric model-ing: states are described as relational features among entities in the environment, i.e., a set of task-related objects O, ac-tions are defined functions that take entity names as inputs and can be executed in the environment. P is a set of task-related predicate symbols , a ground atom p is a predicate 2Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

that contains specific arguments, such as Contains(bridge, apple). If a state s satisfies s |= p, it indicates that s seman-tically entails the interpretation of p. The agentic task is to generate an execution trajectory τ = ( s0, a 0, . . . , s H ) that terminates in a state satisfying the overall task goal g.

LLM-Driven Skill Induction. To bridge the gap between interaction experiences and reusable capabilities, the com-munity introduce the concept of programmatic skills (Wang et al., 2024a; 2025b). Generally, it is defined as an ex-ecutable program that composes a sequence of primitive actions to achieve a parameterized sub-goal ω(θ), where the parameterizers θ represent the different instantiations of the sub-goal ω, e.g., find and pick(desirable item=‘apple’) .Unlike black-box neural policies, these skills are represented as code artifacts (e.g., Python functions), allowing LLMs to read, write, and execute them directly. Formally, given a dataset Dω = {τ1, . . . , τ N } of successful trajectories τi sat-isfying ω(θi) (i.e., sHi |= ω(θi)), the objective is to induce a skill πω that maximizes execution success: 

π∗ 

> ω

= arg max   

> πω∼PLLM (·|D πω )

X

> τi∈D ω

I [Exec (πω , Init (τi)) |= ω(θi)] 

where PLLM denotes the probability sampling by LLMs, and 

I[·] is the indicator function. The term Exec (πω , Init (τi)) |=

ω(θi) signifies that executing the program πω starting from the initial state of τi results in a state satisfying the sub-goal ω(θi). Existing works (Wang et al., 2025c) employ an LLM-as-judge to estimate the success rate on τi, while other approaches assume the states from empirical trajectories could be re-instantiated and verify the proposed skill πω in the online environment (Wang et al., 2025b; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yu et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2026). Once validated, the induced skills are registered into a Skill Library , expanding the action space with reliable sub-routines. By prioritizing these stable skills over iterative reasoning, agents mitigate cascading errors in long-horizon tasks. 

4. A Neuro-Symbolic Skill Representation 

In this section, we propose a Neuro-Symbolic Representa-tion that bridges the gap between observations and actions with neural perception and symbolic execution, transform-ing skills from static scripts into dynamic, logic-grounded workflows. Departing from rigid parameterized scripts, our formalism leverages explicit First-Order Logic (FOL) and graph-structured control flows to enable verifiable correct-ness, dynamic variable binding, and modular composition. 

4.1. Skill Workflows with Neuro-Symbolic Grounding 

A fundamental challenge in agentic skill learning lies in bridging the gap between unstructured, ambiguous obser-vations and the precise, state-dependent logic required for robust skill execution. To address this, we propose a Neuro-Symbolic Skill Representation that explicitly decouples 

perceptual grounding from execution workflow . Concretely, we formalize a skill schema as a triple πω = ( θω , ϕ ω , G ω ),consisting of invocation parameters θω , a neural grounding module ϕω , and a symbolic execution graph Gω . This ar-chitecture assigns distinct operational roles to leverage the complementary strengths of neural and symbolic systems: 

Neural Feedback Perception ( ϕω ): We employ the LLM as a semantic grounding perceptor . At each step, it processes raw, unstructured environmental observations st to update a structured symbolic state Zt. This acts as the bridge: since the program’s execution logic relies on symbolic predicates, this transformation provides the necessary symbolic basis 

for the program to interpret diverse environmental feedback and precisely determine the subsequent action. 

Symbolic Execution Logic ( Gω ): The core behavioral logic is encapsulated into a workflow graph Gω , which is exe-cuted by a symbolic interpreter . Once synthesized, this graph dictates the control flow via conditional determin-ism . By operating on the grounded symbolic predicates in 

Zt, it employs explicit branching to rigorously map diverse state configurations to specific actions. This effectively ex-tracts a reusable and adaptive execution workflow. Unlike prior state-blind scripts that follow rigid sequences, our logic-grounded graph naturally incorporates environmen-tal feedback into the control structure, enabling the skill to autonomously adapt to diverse state configurations. 

4.2. Inducing Execution Logic via Node Invention 

The symbolic workflow Gω = ( V, E ) is structured as a directed graph sharing an internal scope C. This scope acts as a centralized memory for invocation parameters and inter-mediate variables, which nodes v ∈ V consume and update via defined interfaces. Unlike conventional workflow gen-eration methods (Zhang et al., 2025b;a; Shang et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025b) assembling pre-defined nodes (e.g., Debate, Voting), we constructs skills by inventing the in-ternal execution logic of each node. Nodes are not static pre-defined tools, but generative programmatic primitives synthesized to govern specific aspects of execution. In this section, we focus on the functional semantics of these mod-ules, deferring the induction details to Sec. 5. Specifically, we categorize them into four logic-grounded operators: 

Data Operation ( DataOp ): Inventing Dynamic Variable Binding. DataOps represent the reasoning steps that pre-cede action, which synthesizes an explicit variable transfor-mation program fv : C × Z → C that queries the symbolic world state Z using variables from the current scope C

and writes the resolved result back to C. This enforces a 

think-then-act logic, ensuring necessary arguments are rig-orously resolved before execution. To achieve this, given a vocabulary of task-related predicates (e.g., locates, contains )3Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks Modular Synthesis Online Evolution Offline Induction                     

> Branching
> Control Data Terminal Action
> True False
> Crossover
> Lifting
> 𝓍
> 𝓎
> Fun c(var= 𝓍 /𝓎 )
> 𝕧
> LoopFold
> 𝓍 𝟏 Fun c(var= [𝑥 "])𝓍 𝟐 𝓍 𝟑
> 𝓍 𝟒 𝓍 𝟓
> 𝓍 𝒊
> End
> Continue
> Successful Demonstrations
> Intra -Trajectory
> Consolidation
> Inter -Trajectory
> Consolidation
> Empirical Consistency ↑
> Program Complexity ↓
> Observation
> Action
> >>
> >
> 𝕧
> Variable Binding
> Condition Invention
> Function Reuse
> Structural Abstraction
> Skill Library
> Skill Honing
> Reflective
> Planning
> Success Fail
> Sub -Goal Success despite Skill Failure
> Sub -Goal Failed due to Skill Failure
> Feasibility Condition Revision
> X
> Update
> Failure
> Terminal
> Recovery
> Trajectory
> Modular
> Composition
> Iterative optimization
> LLM Induction

NeSy Grounding        

> Search(‘Queen size bed’)
> Click(‘Product xxx’)
> Click(‘Option’)
> …
> Click(‘Buy Now’)
> Goto(‘Table’)
> Goto(‘Stove’)
> Take(‘Pan’)
> …
> Place(‘ Pan ’, xx)
> locate (Agent, Stove )
> on (Pan, Stove)
> on (Pan, Stove)
> on (Bread, Stove )
> First -Order Logic Grammar
> not <x>, <x> and <y>, <x> or <y>
> for -all <condition> , exists <condition>
> …
> locate (Agent, Stove)
> and on (Pan, Stove)
> →Pick (Pan)
> State Grounding Execution Logic
> Perception Reasoning

Figure 2. The overall framework of NSI. Starting with NeSy Grounding, the system maps environmental perception to a logical exuction space governed by First-Order Logic. The core mechanism, Offline Induction, abstracts successful demonstrations into reusable skills via modular synthesis. These skills are maintained in a library and updated through Online Evolution, where a reflective planner utilizes interaction feedback to correct feasibility conditions and modularly compose recovery trajectories to hone the skills. 

and logical grammar (e.g., and , or , select one ), the frame-work adaptively composes these primitives to invent specific binding expressions (e.g., target=select one(x, is type(x, ‘apple’) ∧ contains(loc, x)) where loc=select one(y, lo-cates(‘agent’, y)) ), rather than invoking pre-defined rules. This expressive composition allows the agent to articulate complex state dependencies and autonomously discover the precise variables needed for robust execution. 

Control Operation ( CheckOp, LoopOp ): Inventing Deci-sion Boundaries. These nodes govern the flow of execution, determining when to branch or iterate, which synthesizes an explicit conditional expression pv : C × Z → { True , False }

that captures the execution branch. By utilizing the same predicate vocabulary and logical grammar, the framework composes discriminative logical expressions (e.g., construct-ing is closed(y) ∧ locates(‘agent’,y) as the critical condition) to capture the execution branch. This explicitly integrates environment information into the control flow, enabling the skill to adapt to dynamic state changes. 

Primitive Operation ( PrimitiveOp ): Grounded Action Execution. PrimitiveOps serve as the interface to the envi-ronment, which executes atomic actions A(var ) parameter-ized by the shared scope C. Instead of using static values, the arguments var are dynamic references explicitly bound by preceding DataOps (e.g., pick(target) where target is dynamically resolved from C). This ensures that physical actions are strictly grounded in the preceding reasoning steps, guaranteeing that the agent’s behavior is rigorously aligned with its logical derivation. 

Terminal Operation ( TerminalOp ): Execution Feedback. 

These nodes mark the conclusion of a skill’s lifecycle. A 

Success node returns a completion signal, validating the goal. A Failure node notifies the agent of termination while automatically generating a logic-grounded diagnosis based on the execution context (e.g., returning “Target not found after navigation: ∄ x, is type(x, ‘apple’)” ). This feedback attributes the failure of the skill execution logic in potential new instances, facilitating effective re-planning. This fine-grained, modular node design is pivotal for lo-calized refinement. By encapsulating logic into distinct, invented units, the agent can iteratively refine specific nodes (e.g., correcting a binding logic in a DataOp ) without need-ing to regenerate the entire skill, enabling efficient induction. 

4.3. Interactive Execution Semantics with Control Flow 

Execution is formalized as a dynamic traversal over Gω ,maintained by an explicit state ξt = ( vt, Ct, Z t), structured to strictly separate control logic from perceptual grounding: 

Neural State Tracking (Perceive): Instead of conflating perception and execution, during the skill execution, the LLM functions as a semantic state tracker ϕω , parsing 

ot+1 to update specific predicates in Zt (e.g., updating ‘is open(x)’ when the observation feedbacks). 

Symbolic Resolution (Think): The interpreter determin-4Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

istically evaluates node vt based on Ct and Zt, performing variable binding or branching (e.g., evaluating ‘is open(x)’) to determine the next step, ensuring traceable control flow. It emits a null action at = ⊥, preserving ot+1 = ot.

Grounded Interaction (Act): At a PrimitiveOp , the system emits a physical action at̸ = ⊥, whose arguments are pre-cisely instantiated from Ct, triggering an environment tran-sition and obtaining a new observation ot+1 = T (ot, a t).

5. Logic-Grounded Skill Induction 

Having established the neuro-symbolic representation of skills as executable graphs Gω in Section 4, we now address the algorithmic challenge of synthesizing these structures from interaction experiences. To bootstrap the induction, we first extract sub-goals from the raw interaction trajectories. Similar to (Wang et al., 2025c;b; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yu et al., 2025), we utilize the LLMs to identify resuable process and critical state changes in the raw trajectories, effectively segmenting long-horizon episodes into sub-goal directed sub-trajectories τ ω . We assume access to a dataset Dω = {(τ ωi , ω (θi)) } of such segmented demonstrations for the each sub-goal ω(θ).

5.1. Empirical Programmatic Consistency 

In partially observable environments such as embodied or web tasks, perfectly re-instantiating the environment to ver-ify a skill hypothesis is often infeasible. Therefore, instead of online environment verification (Wang et al., 2025b; Yu et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025a), we ground our consistency check in the historical execution traces. We verify whether the induced skill logic, when executed against the recorded states, faithfully reproduces the expert’s action sequence while accommodating necessary internal reasoning steps. We define empirical programmatic consistency by synchro-nizing the skill’s action steps with the expert’s trajectory. A skill πω instantiated with θ at step h is consistent with trace 

τ ∈ D ω starting at h if its generated actions ˆa match the expert’s a∗ starting from sh:

Consistent (τ, π ω , θ, h )=I

h

∀k, ˆak̸ = ⊥ =⇒ ˆak = a∗

> h+m(k)

i (1) where m(k) maps the k-th program step to the correspond-ing action index. Formally, we try to synthesize a skill policy πω that maximizes the empirical consistency of the data Dω while minimizing program complexity. We define the Empirical Consistency Region bRτπω as the set of states in a trajectory τ from which πω can successfully reproduce the subsequent expert actions. The induction objective is: 

max 

> πω

X 

> τ∈D ω

bRτπω − λ |πω | (2) 

bRτπω ≜

n

sh ∈ τ ∃θ, Consistent (τ, π ω , θ, h ) = 1 

o

.

where |πω | denotes the program complexity. This objective encourages the discovery of skills that are both empirically consistent and structurally concise. 

5.2. Progressive Skill Induction from Experiences 

Given the combinatorial and non-differentiable nature of the program space G, directly maximizing the global ob-jective in Eq. 2 is intractable. To address this, we propose a progressive specialization-to-generalization process: (1) Intra-Trajectory Consolidation, which synthesizes Local Ex-perts πτ specifically fitting each demonstration trace, and (2) Inter-Trajectory Merging, which recursively unifies these lo-cal experts and constructs a generalized skill program πglobal 

that satisfies the Minimum Description Length principle. In this subsection, we simplify the notation πω as π, as the induction process operates on a given sub-goal ω.

Stage 1: Intra-Trajectory Logic Consolidation. 

The first stage aims to synthesize a local expert πτ that maximizes consistency within a single reference trajectory 

τ ∈ D ω . This ensures that the skill logic is at least locally valid, and serves as an initialization for the optimization. We employ an iterative consistency check and refinement 

loop. The system scans the trajectory for an uncovered state serr (where serr is a state within the sequence τ ) for which the current policy πτ fails the consistency check (i.e., 

serr /∈ bRτπτ ). This is analogous to identifying hard negatives or counter-examples in program synthesis. Upon detec-tion, the synthesizer updates πτ to resolve the conflict at 

serr by computing a Structural Consolidation of the logic. This typically involves introducing conditional branches (CheckOp ) to handle the divergence, effectively expanding the skill’s feasibility region. Critically, this allows the sys-tem to discover latent branching logic (e.g., “open door only if closed”) even from a single linear trace by identifying state conditions that necessitate different actions, thereby improving generalization. 

Stage 2: Inter-Trajectory Skill Consolidation. 

The second stage maximizes the global empirical consis-tency (Eq. 2) by consolidating multiple local experts into a generalizable global skill. We adopt a greedy iterative opti-mization. At each iteration k, we first identify the hardest constraint πhard , the local expert corresponding to the trajec-tory τ that is least covered by the current global skill πk

> glb

.We then synthesize a candidate skill πk+1  

> cand

by structurally 5Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

merging the current global skill with this bottleneck expert: 

πk+1  

> cand

= Consolidate (πk

> glb

, π hard ) (3) The global skill is updated to πk+1  

> cand

only if the candidate satisfies Feasibility Dominance (i.e., strictly expanding cov-erage while maintaining consistency): 

πk+1  

> glb

←

(πk+1  

> cand

, if bRπ(k)

> glb

⊂ bRπcand 

π(k) 

> glb

, otherwise (4) We implement the Consolidate operator via LLM-based program synthesis, which introduces abstract variables and control flows to unify distinct logical paths, utilizing the MDL principle to prevent overfitting. 

Structural Operators for Logic Consolidation. 

To effectively navigate the program space towards the MDL-optimal solution in both stages, we equip the LLM synthe-sizer with a set of primitive structural operators. These oper-ators are designed to resolve logical conflicts via branching or compress redundancy via abstraction: 

Conditional Branching ( Branching ): Aligning two pro-gram graphs to find their common structure. For diver-gent paths, it resolves conflicts via Predicate Invention :synthesizing a discriminative predicate (e.g., inserting if is closed(fridge) to unify a trace that opens the fridge with one that does not) to act as a guard condition. This explicitly introduces new control flow to handle envi-ronmental variations, enabling state-dependent execution 

that dynamically adapts to the current context. 

Modular Crossover ( Crossover ): Exploits the modularity of the graph representation to inherit structural components. Because each node (e.g., a CheckOp or a specific action sub-routine) acts as an independent module defined by its vari-able interface, this operator can identify useful subgraphs in a donor skill πhard and graft them into πglb . The adaptation is achieved solely by rebinding the input parameters of the transferred nodes to the execution context of πglb , enabling efficient logic reuse without re-synthesis. 

Variable Lifting ( Lifting ): Converts instance-specific traces into generalized logic by lifting hard-coded constants to explicit input parameters. Instead of binding to specific entities (e.g., one trace washes an apple at a sink and another uses a basin ), the operator prompts the LLM to discover the shared permutation-invariant property of the entities (e.g., being a washable station) across traces and exposes it as a parameter. This empowers the agent to autonomously select any valid resource at runtime (e.g., choosing sink, basin or other washable station), achieving generalization across functionally equivalent objects. 

Loop Folding ( LoopFold ): Synthesizes iterative control flow by detecting repetitive substructures acting on different targets. The operator abstracts a sequential unrolling (e.g., 

check(A), check(B), ... ) into a concise LoopOp 

that iterates over a given list (derived from an external ar-gument or an internal DataOp ). This enables the skill to scale to variable-sized object collections while maintaining a compact program representation regardless of the number of targets, adhering to the MDL principle. 

5.3. Online Skill Evolution via Reflective Planning 

Following standard skill-based planning frameworks (Wang et al., 2024a; 2025c), we utilize the LLM as a planner that dynamically selects between invoking an induced skill or executing a raw action. The skills are exposed to the planner via their function signatures and docstrings, which summa-rize the Feasibility Region bRσ , allowing the LLM to gauge applicability based on the current state description. 

Reflective Planning with State-aware Feedback. The pro-posed logic-grounded skills offer more than binary success signals. When a skill execution fails, it terminates at a spe-cific Failure Node that returns diagnostic symbolic feedback (e.g., the fridge is still closed and cannot sure objects inside, 

is closed(fridge) ). It provides the reasons of execution fail-ure, enabling Reflective Planning , utilizing this diagnostic information to generate a corrective plan, comprising alter-native skills, or raw actions (e.g., open(fridge) ), to bridge the gap from the failure state to the original sub-goal. 

Skill Honing. This reflective mechanism closes the loop for self-evolution, driving the continuous refinement of πω

based on the outcome of the recovery attempt . If the correc-tive plan succeeds, the system treats the recovery trajectory as a newly discovered logical branch. It employs Logic Con-solidation operators to “grow” the skill graph by grafting this logic onto the failure node, effectively generalizing the skill to handle previously unmodeled exceptions via new conditional paths. This new subgraph is initially marked as tentative to maintain policy stability, and is permanently solidified only if it consistently resolves the failure in sub-sequent encounters. Conversely, if the recovery fails, it signifies that the sub-goal is fundamentally unattainable from the current state. The system then restricts the skill’s usage by updating its docstring to explicitly exclude such infeasible contexts, thereby aligning the skill’s description with its actual feasible region. 

6. Empirical Study 

6.1. Experimental Setup and Baselines 

The evaluation is conducted on three agentic benchmarks: 

ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) is a text-based embodied environment derived from the ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020) 3D household robotics simulator. The benchmark 6Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks                                              

> Table 1. Main Results. We compare NSI against baselines on ALFWorld, WebShop, and TextCraft. We report Success Rate for all domains, and additionally Reward Score for WebShop. Our proposed method achieves consistent improvements.
> ALFWorld WebShop TextCraft Method Success Rate (%) Score(%) Success Rate (%) Success Rate (%)
> ReAct (Yao et al., 2022b) 85.8 44.0 20.0 62.0 Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) 84.3 40.8 23.0 59.0 ADaPT (Prasad et al., 2024) 67.9 45.8 29.0 72.5 StateAct (Rozanov & Rei, 2025) 84.3 40.6 8.00 83.0 AWM offline (Wang et al., 2025c) 88.6 ±1.1 51.8 ±1.7 32.2 ±1.3 66.3 ±2.0 AWM (Wang et al., 2025c) 91.3 ±0.8 49.2 ±1.9 30.0 ±2.0 92.5 ±3.6 ASI (Wang et al., 2025b) 70.6 ±1.9 7.7 ±1.7 7.50 ±3.0 77.8 ±1.8 NSI w.o. online honing 93.5 ±1.9 58.8 ±1.8 30.5 ±1.5 78.5 ±2.5 NSI (Ours) 98.0 ±1.2 76.5 ±1.2 44.5 ±1.5 95.2 ±0.8

evaluates agents on long-horizon decision-making under partial observability, comprising 134 test instances across six task types. Following established protocols (Yao et al., 2022b), we utilize the two standard demonstrations per task type, previously used for in-context prompting, as the data source for offline skill induction. 

WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a) simulates a rich e-commerce platform. The benchmark assesses an agent’s ability to navigate product pages, choose attributes, and execute pur-chases to satisfy user queries. To ensure fair comparison, we restrict skill induction to a single successful purchase trajectory, aligning with the one-shot demonstration setup used in standard in-context learning baselines. 

TextCraft (Prasad et al., 2024) evaluates compositional generalization in Minecraft crafting on 200 recursive tasks (depths 2–4). With only simple demonstrations (3 expert trajectories, depth=1), agents must compose primitives to solve unseen long-horizon goals. 

Competing Baselines. We compare our approach against a diverse set of baselines representing different agentic paradigms: (1) ReAct (Yao et al., 2022b), a well-validated prompting strategy that interleaves reasoning traces with action execution. (2) Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), which leverages linguistic episodic memory to reflect on past fail-ures and improve future performance. (3) ADaPT (Prasad et al., 2024), which improves long-horizon planning by explicitly decomposing overall tasks into sub-goals. (4) 

StateAct (Rozanov & Rei, 2025), which guides the agent to perform explicit state analysis before determining ac-tions. (5) AWM (Wang et al., 2025c), which abstracts reusable workflow patterns from successful trajectories into text-based memory. (6) ASI (Wang et al., 2025b), which induces parameterized programmatic skills but lacks the explicit logic-grounded control flow and variable binding of our method. For fair comparison, we utilize GPT-4o as the backbone model across all methods and set the tempera-ture to 0 to improve the reproducibility. We report mean ±

standard deviation over 3 runs for skill-induction methods. 

6.2. Main Results 

We present the results in Table 1. Our proposed NSI con-sistently achieves consistent performance improvements across three benchmarks, surpassing the strongest baselines by significant margins. From the results, we could find that: 

Limitations of Unstructured Memory and Pure Decom-position. The performance of Reflexion indicates that linguistic episodic memory offers limited generalization across varying episodes, yielding negligible gains over Re-Act. While ADaPT excels in recursive decomposition for TextCraft, it shows limited effectiveness in ALFWorld. In such domains, the difficulty arises from partial observabil-ity and long-horizon interaction required to realize sub-goals, rather than high-level decomposition. Consequently, ADaPT’s focus on planning fails to address the critical bot-tleneck of long-horizon execution. 

The Necessity of Expressive Skill Representation. AWM achieves stable gains by abstracting experiences into text-based workflows, validating the importance of process reuse .However, when ASI attempts to formalize these into param-eterized programs, performance drops. This reveals an ex-pressiveness gap : linear scripts cannot capture the complex logic inherent in the tasks, rendering them less effective than even unstructured text summaries. 

Advantage of Logic-Grounded Skills. In contrast, our NSI leverages neuro-symbolic learning to generate logic-grounded skills. Unlike linear scripts, NSI’s programs inter-nalize reusable processes into verifiable, state-aware logic (e.g., branches and loops). This capability significantly en-hances the agent’s ability to realize sub-goals, driving con-sistent and substantial improvements in both long-horizon execution and generalization. To understand why NSI outperforms baseline programmatic agents, we analyze the structural properties of the induced 7Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks Check Node               

> locate(SINK_NAME)
> SKILL: clean_item_and_place
> Args : CLEAN_ITEM : ItemName
> SINK_NAME: ReceptacleName
> TOREC: ReceptacleName
> Primitive Action Node
> Goto (SINK)
> Primitive Action Node
> Clean (CLEAN_ITEM) with (SINK)
> No
> Yes
> Check Node
> not is_closed (TOREC )
> Check Node
> locate(SINK_NAME)
> Primitive Action Node
> Goto ( TOREC )
> No
> Yes
> Primitive Action Node
> Move (CLEAN_ITEM) to ( TOREC )
> SUCCESS
> Yes
> FAILURE
> The target receptacle
> {TOREC }is closed, so
> {CLEAN_ITEM} cannot
> be placed inside .
> No
> Primitive Action Node
> Open ( TOREC )

Provisional Module                                 

> Clean aheld item using asink and
> then place it in aspecified receptacle .
> SKILL: search_and_open_product
> Args : QUERY_TEXT: SearchQuery Search for aproduct using asearch
> query and open aspecific product
> from the search results .
> Primitive Action Node
> Search (QUERY_TEXT)
> Data Node
> PRODUCT_TO_CLICK =
> select_one (' ProductId ', descrption_match (x)))
> Check Node
> is_button_clickable (PRODUCT_TO_ CLICK )
> Primitive Action Node
> Click ( PRODUCT_TO_CLICK )
> Yes
> SUCCESS
> Primitive Action Node

Provisional Module                                            

> Click (“ Next_Page ”)
> Check Node
> is_button_clickable (“ Next_Page ”)
> No
> FAILURE
> After reviewing all search
> result pages, no product
> was found that satisfies the
> user’s requirements .
> Yes
> No
> FAILURE
> There are no products on
> this page that meet the
> user’s requirements .
> SKILL: craft_item_from_ingredients
> Args : TARGET_ITEM: ItemName
> NEED_COUNT: Count
> INGREDIENTS: List_ItemName
> INGREDIENTS_COUNT: List_Count
> Craft the target item using specified
> ingredients based on the crafting recipes
> Loop Node
> For LOOP_INDEX, INGREDIENT_I
> in enumerate( INGREDIENTS )
> Data Node
> TARGET_COUNT =
> select_inde x(INGREDIENTS_COUNT ,LOOP_INDEX )
> AVAILABLE_COUNT =
> current_count_of_item (INGREDIENT_I)
> Check Node
> AVAILABLE_ COUNT >= TARGET_COUNT
> FAILURE
> The craft lacks the required
> materials {INGREDIENT_I }.
> Yes
> Continue Loop
> Loop Body
> Primitive Action Node
> Craft { NEED_COUNT }
> {TARGET_ITEM }
> with { INGREDIENTS_COUNT }
> {INGREDIENTS }
> Loop Terminates
> Primitive Action Node
> Get { NEED_COUNT } { TARGET_ITEM }

Provisional Module 

> No
> SUCCESS

Replace 

Replace 

Replace 

Figure 3. Representative cases of online skill evolution across three benchmarks. 

(a) Execution Efficiency (b) Long-Horizon Robustness 

Figure 4. Impact of Logic-Grounded Skills. (a) NSI encapsulates complex logic into multi-step skills, efficiently compressing the planning horizon. (b) This structural advantage prevents the execu-tion collapse observed in baselines during long-horizon tasks. 

skills and their impact on long-horizon planning. 

Efficiency and Logical Cohesion. We first investigate the internal execution efficiency of individual skills. As shown in Figure 4a, NSI exhibits a significant advantage in handling extended interaction sequences. Specifically, while maintaining a high sub-goal success rate, NSI achieves a 100%–140% improvement in the average number of atomic steps ( avg steps ) executed per skill invocation compared to ASI. This indicates that our logic-grounded representation possesses higher semantic abstraction and stronger logical cohesion. By internalizing complex state-dependent logic (e.g., conditional recovery and dynamic binding) within the skill itself, NSI prevents the agent from losing sight of long-term goals during execution, a common failure mode for linear agents in dynamic environments. 

Quantifying the Horizon Gap. A survival analysis (Fig-ure 4b) reveals a critical divergence at the 22-step threshold. While baselines match NSI on shorter tasks, they suffer a 

Long-Horizon Collapse (> 22 steps) due to accumulating reasoning errors, dropping to zero success. In contrast, NSI sustains performance about 50 steps. By encapsulating ∼7.4 atomic actions per skill, NSI effectively compresses the plan-ning horizon, shifting from fragile micro-management to robust macro-execution. 

Horizon Compression via NSI. Conversely, NSI success-fully bridges this gap, sustaining valid execution up to 53+ steps without a corresponding spike in high-level planning complexity. By encapsulating approximately 7.4 atomic steps into each modular skill, NSI effectively “compresses” the planning horizon back into the LLM’s comfort zone. This shift from micro-management to macro-execution en-ables NSI to solve tasks that are mathematically intractable for linear script-based agents, transforming transient run-time interactions into stable, goal-directed abilities. 

6.3. Modular Skill Honing 

Figure 3 illustrates the dynamic modular graph growth of skills during online deployment. Initially, the skill func-tions as a logic skeleton induced from minimal offline data. However, as the agent interacts, runtime failures inevitably expose logic gaps, i.e., states where the initial logic is in-sufficient. Instead of discarding the faulty skill, Reflective Planning catches the failure and generates a local corrective trajectory. This trajectory is subsequently synthesized into a functional subgraph and grafted onto the specific Failure Node via topological expansion. This process transforms ter-minal failures into conditional recovery branches, enabling the skill to incrementally “grow” to handle emerging edge cases (e.g., adding a CheckOp for closed doors). Conse-quently, the skill evolves from a simple linear chain into a robust, branching network, repairing its own logic without altering the correctly functioning parts. 8Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced Neuro-Symbolic Skill Induc-tion (NSI), a framework that transforms transient agentic reasoning into persistent, logic-grounded skills. By lifting interaction traces into modular programs, NSI transcends the limitations of linear parameterized scripts, synthesizing explicit control flows and dynamic variable bindings. Fur-thermore, our proposed Reflective Planning mechanism em-powers agents to autonomously repair and grow these skill graphs during deployment, converting runtime failures into permanent logic improvements. Empirical results across embodied, web, and game domains demonstrate that NSI significantly compresses planning horizons and achieves efficient generalization. 

8. Impact Statement 

This work introduces NSI, a framework that enhances the long-horizon planning and generalization capabilities of LLM-driven agents. By lifting interaction traces into logic-grounded programs, NSI promotes resource-efficient AI development, reducing the dependency on extensive demon-stration data or manual engineering. While these advance-ments improve the utility of agents in complex digital and embodied environments, they also necessitate caution: more capable autonomous agents could potentially be misused in sensitive domains. We emphasize that such performance-boosting methods should be deployed alongside rigorous safety alignment and ethical guardrails to mitigate the risk of biased or unintended behaviors. 

References 

Anderson, J. R. Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological review , 89(4):369, 1982. Garrett, C. R., Chitnis, R., Holladay, R. M., Kim, B., Silver, T., Kaelbling, L. P., and Lozano-P ´erez, T. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 4:265–293, 2021. Hu, S., Lu, C., and Clune, J. Automated design of agen-tic systems. In The 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Jiang, P., Lin, J., Shi, Z., Wang, Z., He, L., Wu, Y., Zhong, M., Song, P., Zhang, Q., Wang, H., et al. Adaptation of agentic ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16301 , 2025. Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. R. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The 12th International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Mao, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Wu, J. Neuro-symbolic concepts. Communications of the ACM , 2025. Nam, T., Sun, S.-H., Pertsch, K., Hwang, S. J., and Lim, J. J. Skill-based meta-reinforcement learning. In 10th International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. Niu, B., Song, Y., Lian, K., Shen, Y., Yao, Y., Zhang, K., and Liu, T. Flow: Modularized agentic workflow automa-tion. In The 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Pertsch, K., Lee, Y., and Lim, J. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned skill priors. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 188–204, 2021. Prasad, A., Koller, A., Hartmann, M., Clark, P., Sabharwal, A., Bansal, M., and Khot, T. Adapt: As-needed decom-position and planning with language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. Qiao, S., Fang, R., Qiu, Z., Wang, X., Zhang, N., Jiang, Y., Xie, P., Huang, F., and Chen, H. Benchmarking agentic workflow generation. In The 13th International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2025. Rozanov, N. and Rei, M. Stateact: Enhancing llm base agents via self-prompting and state-tracking. In Proceed-ings of the 1st Workshop for Research on Agent Language Models , pp. 367–385, 2025. Shang, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, K., Ma, L., Liu, J., Xu, F., and Li, Y. Agentsquare: Automatic llm agent search in modular design space. In The 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Shi, H., Yuan, X., and Liu, B. Evolving programmatic skill networks, 2026. Shi, L. X., Lim, J. J., and Lee, Y. Skill-based model-based reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning ,pp. 2262–2272, 2023. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal rein-forcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:8634–8652, 2023. Shridhar, M., Thomason, J., Gordon, D., Bisk, Y., Han, W., Mottaghi, R., Zettlemoyer, L., and Fox, D. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10740–10749, 2020. Shridhar, M., Yuan, X., Cote, M.-A., Bisk, Y., Trischler, A., and Hausknecht, M. Alfworld: Aligning text and em-bodied environments for interactive learning. In The 9th 

9Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. Singley, M. K. and Anderson, J. R. The transfer of cognitive skill . Number 9. 1989. Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., and Singh, S. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence , 112(1-2): 181–211, 1999. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research , 2024a. Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024b. Wang, Y., Xu, Z., Huang, Y., Wang, X., Song, Z., Gao, L., Wang, C., Tang, X., Zhao, Y., Cohan, A., et al. Dyflow: Dynamic workflow framework for agentic reasoning. In 

The 39th Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2025a. Wang, Z. Z., Gandhi, A., Neubig, G., and Fried, D. Induc-ing programmatic skills for agentic tasks. In The 2nd Conference on Language Modeling , 2025b. Wang, Z. Z., Mao, J., Fried, D., and Neubig, G. Agent workflow memory. In The 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025c. Xu, D., Mart ´ın-Mart ´ın, R., Huang, D., Zhu, Y., Savarese, S., and Fei-Fei, L. Regression planning networks. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 ,pp. 1317–1327, Vancouver, Canada, 2019. Yao, S., Chen, H., Yang, J., and Narasimhan, K. Web-shop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 35:20744–20757, 2022a. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K. R., and Cao, Y. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The 11th international conference on learning representations , 2022b. Yu, S., Li, G., Shi, W., and Qi, P. Polyskill: Learning gen-eralizable skills through polymorphic abstraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15863 , 2025. Zhang, G., Chen, K., Wan, G., Chang, H., Cheng, H., Wang, K., Hu, S., and Bai, L. Evoflow: Evolving diverse agentic workflows on the fly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07373 ,2025a. Zhang, J., Xiang, J., Yu, Z., Teng, F., Chen, X.-H., Chen, J., Zhuge, M., Cheng, X., Hong, S., Wang, J., et al. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In The 13th International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025b. Zhang, Z., Dai, Q., Bo, X., Ma, C., Li, R., Chen, X., Zhu, J., Dong, Z., and Wen, J.-R. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47, 2025c. Zheng, B., Fatemi, M. Y., Jin, X., Wang, Z. Z., Gandhi, A., Song, Y., Gu, Y., Srinivasa, J., Liu, G., Neubig, G., et al. Skillweaver: Web agents can self-improve by discover-ing and honing skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07079 ,2025a. Zheng, C., Chen, J., Lyu, Y., Ng, W. Z. T., Zhang, H., Ong, Y.-S., Tsang, I., and Yin, H. Mermaidflow: Redefining agentic workflow generation via safety-constrained evolu-tionary programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22967 ,2025b. 10 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

Table 2. The domain-independent first-order logic language, a general reasoning language across domains. 

Name Signature Meaning 

variables x, y, z, · · · Variables that refer to items in the planning domain. types Object, N um, Bool, List (type ) The types of objects, numbers, boolean values, and lists of those types. 

Condition Operators 

predicate p(x, y ) → Bool The function that takes objects and numbers and returns boolean values. not not BoolExpr → Bool The negation of a boolean expression. and, or BoolExpr 1and BoolExpr 2 → Bool The conjunction/disjunction of a boolean expression. 

<,>,== , N umExpr 1 < N umExpr 2 → Bool The comparison of two numerial expressions. 

Variable-Binding Operators 

attribute count (x) → N um The function that takes a object and returns its attribute, e.g. the count. +-*/ N umExpr 1 + N umExpr 2 → N um The numerical calculation of two numerial expressions. select idx sidx (List, N umExpr ) → Object Return the variable at the given index from a ordered list. select one sone (List, BoolExpr ) → Object Return a object satisfying the given boolean expression. select all sall (List, BoolExpr ) → List Return all objects satisfying the given boolean expression. 

A. The Representation Language of NSI 

In this section, we provide a detailed formal specification of the Domain Specific Language (DSL) used to represent the logic-grounded skills in NSI. The representation relies on a First-Order Logic (FOL) grounded vocabulary to bridge the gap between neural perception and symbolic execution. 

A.1. Syntax 

The core syntax of our logic-grounded language is summarized in Table 2. The language consists of two primary layers: 1. Expression Layer: Used within nodes to query states and derive variables. This primarily includes First-Order Logic predicates (e.g., is open (x)) and set operations (e.g., select one ). 2. Control Layer: Specifies the workflow structure, including conditional branching and loops, which are encoded directly into the graph topology of πω .

A.2. Semantics of Skill Nodes 

The execution of a skill πω is governed by the traversal of its graph Gω , where each node type defines specific semantic operations on the shared program scope C and symbolic state Z.

1. Data Operation ( DataOp ): 

Semantics: A DataOp node v acts as a variable binding unit. It executes a synthesized function fv : C × Z → C that resolves abstract arguments into concrete entities. 

Execution Logic: 

• Input: Takes current scope C containing unbound or abstract variables. • Process: Evaluates a logic expression (e.g., target = select one (Os, is apple (x) ∧ is clean (x)) ). This imposes a “Think” step, ensuring actions are parameterized by state-verified entities. • Output: Updates C with the resolved variable ‘target‘. 

2. Control Operation ( ControlOp ): 

Semantics: A ControlOp node functions as a decision gate, evaluating a boolean predicate pv : C × Z → {⊤ , ⊥} to determine the flow of control. 

Execution Logic: 

• Condition Evaluation: The node checks a state condition (e.g., is closed (target )). 11 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

Table 3. The task-specific predicates defined for ALFWorld, WebShop, and TextCraft. These predicates are used to ground the observation into symbolic states. 

Name Signature Meaning 

ALFWorld (Embodied Household) 

is type is type (x, T ) → Bool Check if object x belongs to category T .is clean is clean (x) → Bool Check if object x is in a clean state. is hot is hot (x) → Bool Check if object x is heated. is cool is cool (x) → Bool Check if object x is cooled. is open is open (x) → Bool Check if receptacle x is open. contains contains (x, y ) → Bool Check if receptacle x contains object y.holds holds (x) → Bool Check if the agent is currently holding object x.locates locates (x) → Bool Check if agent is at x.

WebShop (E-Commerce) 

if button clickable if clickable (b) → Bool Check if UI element b is visible and clickable. descrption match match (x) → Bool Check if search result x matches non-price constraints. price match price match (x) → Bool Check if search result x’s price satisfies the budget. current price match curr price () → Bool Check if the currently open item satisfies the budget. current descrption match curr match () → Bool Check if the open item matches goal constraints. current option match opt match (o) → Bool Check if required option o has been correctly selected. current option clicked opt clicked (o) → Bool Check if option o has been clicked on the current page. 

TextCraft (Minecraft Crafting) 

goal goal (x, n ) → Bool Check if the goal requires n units of item x.inventory inventory (x, n ) → Bool Check if the agent has n units of item x.unavailable unavailable (x) → Bool Check if item x is currently unavailable. current count of item count (x) → Count Return the current quantity of item x in the inventory. 

• Branching: – If ⊤ (True): Transition to the “Then” branch (e.g., open (target )). 

– If ⊥ (False): Transition to the “Else” branch (e.g., skip to pick (target )). • This mechanism enables the skill to explicitly handle environmental variations (e.g., open/closed doors) without hallucinating actions. 

3. Primitive Operation ( PrimitiveOp ): 

Semantics: Represents the atomic interface to the environment. 

Execution Logic: Invokes the underlying environment API with arguments strictly fetched from C (e.g., 

Env .step (pick , id = target.id )). 

4. Terminal Operation ( TerminalOp ): 

Semantics: Marks the end of execution and returns a status signal S ∈ { Success , Failure }. In case of failure, it returns a symbolic diagnosis (e.g., ERR: Argument ’target’ not found ), which drives the Reflective Planning process. 

B. Experimental Details 

All baselines utilize GPT-4o as the backbone LLM with temperature set to 0.0 to improve the reproducibility. To ensure reproducibility, we provide the key system directives used in NSI. Full prompts will be available after the code release. 

OBSERVATION TO PREDICATES PROMPT 

You are an AI embodied agent. Your task is to convert each observation ( observation: ... ) into grounded facts for the predicates defined below, based on the literal semantics of each predicate. For each observation: 1. Analyze the text and determine which predicate instances are explicitly supported or falsified. 2. Output two blocks: 12 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

• add facts : List every predicate instance that is definitively true after reading the observation. • remove facts : List predicate instances that the observation falsifies (e.g., an item was previously on a table but is now described elsewhere). If none, return [] .Use the canonical predicate names and argument order: • locates(receptacle id) : True when the observation states (explicitly or implicitly) that the agent is at/on/inside the receptacle. Accept cues such as “You are at ...” or “On the X you see ...” (which implies the agent is at X). If the agent moves, include the previous location in remove facts .• reachable(receptacle id) : True when the observation says the agent can reach/go to the receptacle or when the environment lists nearby surfaces. Treat co-listed surfaces as mutually reachable unless specified otherwise. • is open(receptacle id) : True only if the observation states that the receptacle is open. False if it states the receptacle is closed/shut. • is closed(receptacle id) : True if the observation states that the receptacle is closed/shut, false otherwise. • contains(receptacle id, item id) : True when the observation enumerates items on/in the receptacle. If an item is removed, include the previous contains relation in remove facts .• holding(item id) : True if the observation states “You pick up ...,” “You are holding ...,” or similar. False if the observation says you dropped or placed it elsewhere. • is cleaned(item id) : True when the observation states that the item is cleaned, false otherwise. • is cooled(item id) : True when the observation states that the item is cooled, false otherwise. • is heated(item id) : True when the observation states that the item is heated, false otherwise. • is turned on(item id) : True when the observation states that an item (e.g., a lamp) is turned on, false otherwise. Formatting rules: • Convert names to snake case with numeric suffixes (e.g., “sofa 1” → sofa 1 ). • Use exact predicate syntax, e.g., locates(sofa 1) .• List only facts newly entailed or falsified by this observation; do not repeat persistent facts. • If no changes are entailed, return "add facts": [] and/or "remove facts": [] .Example: Input: facts: [] action: observation: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a coffeetable 1, a diningtable 1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a dresser 1, a garbagecan 1, a sidetable 2, a sidetable 1, and a sofa 1. Your task is to: put two cellphones on the sofa. Output: 

{"add_facts": ["locates(middle_of_room)", "reachable(coffeetable_1)", "reachable(diningtable_1)", "reachable(drawer_4)", "reachable(drawer_3)", "reachable(drawer_2)", "reachable(drawer_1)", 

13 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

"reachable(dresser_1)", "reachable(garbagecan_1)", "reachable(sidetable_2)", "reachable(sidetable_1)", "reachable(sofa_1)" ], "remove_facts": [] }

Input: facts: [ ... ] action: goto dresser 1 observation: On the dresser 1, you see a book 2 and a mug 1. Output: 

{"add_facts": ["locates(dresser_1)", "contains(dresser_1, book_2)", "contains(dresser_1, mug_1)" ], "remove_facts": ["locates(middle_of_room)"] }

Next input: facts: [ ... ] action: take mug 1 from dresser 1 observation: You pick up the mug 1 from the dresser 1. Output: 

{"add_facts": ["holding(mug_1)" ], "remove_facts": ["contains(dresser_1, mug_1)" ]}

Follow this schema strictly for each observation. facts: {facts }

action: {new action }

observation: {new observation }

SUBGOAL EXTRACTION PROMPT 

You are an AI planner for an embodied environment. Summarize the sub-goals from the provided interaction trajectories. These sub-goals should capture the overall task goal and the intermediate steps to achieve it. 

# Data 

Here are some interaction trajectories: 

{examples }

# Detailed Instructions for Sub-Goal Generation: 

• Complexity : Sub-goals should have mediocre complexity: 

– Must include at least two primitive actions; sub-goals implementable by a single action OR one condition check followed by one primitive action are NOT allowed. 

– Steps list length must be between 2 and 5 inclusive (reject 1-step designs). • Generality : Sub-goals must be applicable to other similar tasks, not just the provided examples. • Arguments : Use common variable types (e.g., strings, lists). Avoid complex inputs like another function. • Parameters and Types : For each sub-goal, explicitly list the input parameters and their types. 

14 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

– Allowed parameter types (choose only from): ReceptacleName , ItemName , ReceptacleType ,

ItemType , List T (e.g. List ItemName , List ReceptacleType ). 

– Typed placeholder examples (primitive actions for illustration): * go to {{ gotoRec: ReceptacleName }} 

* open {{ openRec: ReceptacleName }} 

* take {{ takeItem: ItemName }} from {{ fromRec: ReceptacleName }} 

* cool {{ coolItem: ItemName }} with {{ recep: ReceptacleName }} 

* heat {{ heatItem: ItemName }} with {{ recep: ReceptacleName }} 

* clean {{ cleanItem: ItemName }} with {{ recep: ReceptacleName }} 

* move {{ moveItem: ItemName }} to {{ toRec: ReceptacleName }} 

* use {{ desklamp: ItemName }} 

– Typed placeholder examples (overall goal for illustration): * ’find an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} and put it in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’put an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} on a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’clean an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} and put it in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’put a clean item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’put a hot item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’heat an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} and put it in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’put a cool item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’cool an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} and put it in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’* ’examine an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} with the desklamp’ * ’look at an item of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} under the desklamp’ * ’put two items of type {{ itemType: ItemType }} in a receptacle of type {{ RecType: ReceptacleType }} ’

– In the JSON output, provide parameters as strings in the form "param name: param type" .• Start Conditions (Preconditions) : For each sub-goal, specify clear, checkable preconditions under which the sub-goal can begin. If these are not satisfied, this sub-goal MUST NOT be selected. 

– Express conditions succinctly with parameter references (e.g., ”the agent does not locate at {{ gotoRec }} ,and {{ gotoRec }} is reachable”, ”the agent already locates at {{ openRec }} and {{ openRec }} is current closed”, ”the agent already holds a {{ moveItem }} and locates at {{ toRec }} and the {{ toRec }} is current open”). 

– Prefer condition forms that can be grounded in observations or known state (e.g., reachable ,

is open/is closed , contains , holding , exists ). 

– Keep preconditions minimal and necessary; avoid hidden assumptions. • Success Conditions (Postconditions) : For each sub-goal, specify the observable state that must hold after successful completion. If these are not satisfied, the sub-goal is incomplete/failed. 

– Use the same expression style as start conditions with parameter references (e.g., ”the agent locates at {{ gotoRec }} ”, ” {{ openRec }} is current open”, ” {{ toRec }} contains {{ moveItem }} ”, ”the agent holds a {{ moveItem }} ”). 

– Keep postconditions minimal, necessary, and directly verifiable from observations or world facts. 

15 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

• Naming : Name each sub-goal to summarize a multi-step intent, not a single primitive action. 

– Be concise and descriptive; use lowercase with underscores. 

– Do NOT reuse primitive action names or their near variants: go to , open , take , put , move , clean ,

heat , cool , use .

– Prefer names like: locate and open receptacle , retrieve item from container ,

transfer item to surface , clean item and place , heat item then place .• Steps Analysis : For each sub-goal, describe the sequence of actions required to achieve it. 

– Use concise, descriptive parameter names aligned with the Parameters and Types of the current sub-goal. 

– Ground each step in actual primitive actions: go to , open , take , put , move , clean , heat , cool ,

use .

– Express branches and loops using production rules in the form: ”If <condition >, then <primitive action >”. You may use ”Else if” and a final default action when appropriate. 

– Represent loops compactly as: ”For each <X> in <LIST >: <primitive action or rule >” (keep total steps ≤

5). 

– Express condition in natural language with the parameters declared in ”parameters”. 

– Minimum steps policy: ensure the ”steps” array contains 2-5 items and includes at least two non-redundant primitive actions across all rules; do not output single-step sub-goals. • Applicable Tasks : For each sub-goal, provide tasks where it applies. 

– Copy task names verbatim from the source data (no paraphrasing, no reformatting, preserve original casing and punctuation). 

# Output Format: 

‘‘‘json {{ [{{ "name": <sub_goal_1_name, ...>, "parameters": ["param_name_1: param_type_1", ... ], "start_conditions": [ ... ], "success_conditions": [ ... ], "description": "<sub-goal 1 description>" "steps": [ ... ], "applicable_tasks": [ ... ], }}, ... ]}} ‘‘‘ 

SKILL INDUCTION PROMPT 

You are a workflow synthesizer. Your task: • Read the sub-goal and the interaction trajectories, then instantiate the scaffold above to solve ONLY that sub-goal. • For each sub-goal, output ONE Mermaid flowchart style (node-bound inputs, edge-only control). No prose. 

# Sub-goal to implement 

16 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

{sub goal }

# Data trajectories 

Here are some interaction trajectories: 

{examples }

Overall Guideline (must follow exactly): 

• Use lowercase names for local variables and UPPERCASE names for globals (e.g., target rec vs 

TARGET RECEPTACLES ). • Local and global identifiers must stay distinct; do not reuse the same base name with different casing. • Use double braces {{ VAR }} for all placeholders evaluated at run time. • All effects on global state happen inside DataOp/LoopControl nodes via writes GLOBAL: (...) .

Interface/Check/Action MUST NOT include writes GLOBAL .• Branching is ONLY via Check nodes with labels Yes /No . LoopControl uses body /done .• Edge mid-labels can be comma-separated. • For any edge that enters a LoopControl node: use Start Loop to indicate entering/resetting from outside (restart enumeration), and Continue Loop to indicate continuing the current loop. • Every Check/Action with parameters must make them resolvable from GLOBALS or inline bindings in 

local in: (...) .• Respect data-flow ordering: any GLOBAL referenced in a node’s local in must already be assigned by an earlier node via writes GLOBAL .• Avoid unescaped quote characters within quoted strings; escape them to keep JSON and Python strings valid. • Selection helpers select one and select all can be used only inside DataOp nodes. • Node IDs define unique instances. When the same type of node is needed multiple times, duplicate the node by assigning unique IDs (e.g., A OPEN 1 , A OPEN 2 ). 

Domain predicates (allowed inside DataOp/Check nodes): 

• locates( {{ receptacle name }} ); reachable( {{ receptacle name }} )

• contains( {{ receptacle name }} , {{ item name }} ); holding( {{ item name }} )

• is open( {{ receptacle name }} ); is closed( {{ receptacle name }} )

• is cleaned( {{ item name }} ); is theated( {{ item name }} );

is cooled( {{ item name }} ); is turned on( {{ item name }} )

• type checks: is item of type( {{ item name }} , {{ target type }} );

is receptacle of type( {{ receptacle name }} , {{ target type }} )

• Quantifiers, e.g. exists("Item", lambda x: contains( {{ receptacle name }} , x) and is item of type(x, {{ target type }} )) 

Object Selection (ONLY allowed inside DataOp nodes): 

• select one(’Item’ or ’Receptacle’, FOL expression) 

• select all(’Item’ or ’Receptacle’, FOL expression) 

17 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

Reference Mermaid Flow (example for a different sub-goal) Note: The example below targets a different sub-goal and is only to illustrate structure and conventions. Do not copy its semantics if they do not match the current sub-goal. {refered mermaid }

Strict style scaffold (copy-paste exactly, then instantiate only the nodes you need): 

%%{{init: {{’theme’: ’default’, ’themeVariables’: {{’background’: ’#ffffff’}} }} }}%% flowchart TD %% ===================== Class Definitions ===================== %% Guideline: Strictly follow the class definitions. classDef Spec fill:#f4f4ff,stroke:#6a6ab2,stroke-dasharray: 4 3, stroke-width:2px; classDef Interface fill:#e2e2f2,stroke:#6a6ab2,stroke-width:2px; classDef LoopControl fill:#f9e4b7,stroke:#b99b37,stroke-width:2px; classDef PrimitiveAction fill:#f9c2c2,stroke:#c23737,stroke-width:2px; classDef Check fill:#d0e1f9,stroke:#4378a2,stroke-width:2px; classDef DataOp fill:#f0f0f0,stroke:#888888,stroke-width:2px; %% ===================== Type Alias Legend ===================== %% Guideline: Strictly follow the type alias legend. LEGEND["Type Legend:<br>ReceptacleName := str<br>ItemName := str <br>ObjectType := str<br>ReceptacleType := str<br>Bool := bool <br>List_T := sequence of T<br>Optional_T := T or None"]:::Spec %% ===================== Spec ===================== %% Guideline: Strictly follow the Spec. {FLOW_SPEC_NODE} %% ===================== Interface & Spec ===================== %% Guideline: START is entry; *_END are exits. No computations here. %% Guideline: Strictly follow the interface definition. {START_INTERFACE_NODE} SUCCESS_END(["Interface: SUCCESS_FLAG: Bool:=True<br> writes GLOBAL: (SUCCESS_FLAG: Bool:=True)"]):::Interface FAILURE_END(["Interface: SUCCESS_FLAG: Bool:=False<br> writes GLOBAL: (SUCCESS_FLAG: Bool:=False)"]):::Interface %% ===================== Primitive Actions ===================== {ACTION_NODE} %% Guideline: Select the PrimitiveActions Nodes that workflow needs. A_GOTO["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’go to {{goto_rec}}’)<br> local in: (goto_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_OPEN["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’open {{open_rec}}’)<br> local in: (open_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_TAKE["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’take {{take_item}} from {{from_rec}}’) <br>local in: (take_item: ItemName = {{ITEM_TO_TAKE}}, from_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_MOVE["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’move {{move_item}} to {{to_rec}}’)<br> local in: (move_item: ItemName = {{ITEM_TO_MOVE}}, to_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> 

18 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_CLEAN["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’clean {{clean_item}} with {{clean_rec}}’) <br>local in: (clean_item: ItemName = {{ITEM_TO_CLEAN}}, clean_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_HEAT["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’heat {{heat_item}} with {{heat_rec}}’) <br>local in: (heat_item: ItemName = {{ITEM_TO_HEAT}}, heat_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_COOL["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’cool {{cool_item}} with {{cool_rec}}’) <br>local in: (cool_item: ItemName = {{ITEM_TO_COOL}}, cool_rec: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction A_USE["PrimitiveAction: (action: ’use {{use_item}}’)<br> local in: (use_item: ItemName = {{DESKLAMP_TO_USE}})<br> out: (executed: Bool)"]:::PrimitiveAction %% ===================== LoopControl (use only if needed) ============== %% Guideline: Only foreach loops via LoopControl nodes. LOOP_FOR_LOCATIONS["LoopControl: For receptacle_i in {{loop_receptacles}} <br>writes GLOBAL: (CURRENT_RECEPTACLE: ReceptacleName:=receptacle_i) <br>local in: (loop_receptacles: List_ReceptacleName = {{RECEPTACLE_CANDIDATES}})"]:::LoopControl {LOOP_FOR_NODE} %% ===================== Checks ===================== %% Guideline: Checks branch on Yes/No only. C_IS_CLOSED["Check: is_closed({{rec_name_to_check}})<br> local in: (rec_name_to_check: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}})"]:::Check C_HAS_TYPE["Check: exists(Item, lambda x: contains({{rec_name_to_check}}, x) and is_item_of_type(x, {{item_type_to_check}}))<br> local in: (rec_name_to_check: ReceptacleName = {{CURRENT_RECEPTACLE}}, item_type_to_check: ItemType = {{TARGET_ITEM_TYPE}})"]:::Check {CHECK_NODE} %% ===================== Data Operation ===================== %% Guideline: All GLOBAL writes and data-binding happen in DataOp nodes. {D_INIT_NODE} D_SELECT_ONE_ITEM_WITH_TYPE["DataOp: writes GLOBAL: (TARGET_ITEM: ItemName = select_one(\’Item\’, is_item_of_type(x, {{select_item_type}}))) <br>local in: (select_item_type: ItemType = {{TARGET_ITEM_TYPE}})"]:::DataOp D_SELECT_ALL_RECEPTACLE_WITH_TYPE["DataOp: writes GLOBAL: (SELECTED_RECEPTACLES: List_ReceptacleName = select_all(\’Receptacle\’, is_receptacle_of_type(x, {{select_rec_type}}))) <br> local in: (select_rec_type: ReceptacleTypeName = {{TARGET_REC_TYPE}})"]:::DataOp 

19 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

{DATA_OP_NODE} %% ===================== Node Class Assignments ===================== {CLASS_ASSIGNMENTS} %% ===================== Legend links ===================== START -.- FLOW_SPEC START -.- LEGEND %% ===================== Control-Flow Edges ===================== {CONTROL_FLOW_EDGE} {HINTS} 

SKILL-ACTION ROUTER PROMPT 

You are a skill/action router for an embodied household agent. Decide which skill or raw action should be executed next. 

# Task and history 

{task message }

# Current world facts (set semantics) 

{facts current }

# Task guideline 

{task guideline }

Routing steps: 

1. Pick the active or next sub-task from the ordered subtasks in the task guideline using the history and facts. 2. For that sub-task, compare triggers/pre/post contexts in skill guidelines and raw action guidelines 

against the current facts/intents. 3. Propose up to 3 candidates (skills preferred) with evidence and expected outcome. 4. Recommend one candidate; if none apply, return type ”none” and list missing info. 

Strict JSON ONLY (no prose, no code fences): 

{"active_subtask": "<sub-task name from ordered_subtasks>", "subtask_reason": "<why this sub-task is active/next>", "candidates": [ {"type": "skill|action", "name": "<skill name or raw action name>", "phase": "<phase/sub-task it aligns to>", "trigger_match": ["<triggers or pre-context cues that match>"], "supporting_facts": ["<facts that justify applicability>"], "expected_outcome": "<state change or follow-up intent>", "confidence": 0.0 }], "recommendation": { "type": "skill|action|none", "name": "<recommended name or none>", 

20 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

"why": "<short rationale>" }, "missing_info": ["<what evidence is needed if nothing applies>"] }

SKILL-ACTION EXECUTION PROMPT 

Interact with a household to execute the routed skill/action. 

# Routing recommendation (follow unless impossible) 

{routing recommendation }

# Here are two examples: 

{examples }

# Here is the task. 

{task message }

# Current world facts: 

{facts current }

# Available actions: 

• think : ¡thought about the overall task goal, sub-goals decomposition, current state, and the next sub-goal¿ • go to : ¡ReceptacleName¿ • open : ¡ReceptacleName¿ • take : ¡ItemName¿ from ¡ReceptacleName¿ • move : ¡ItemName¿ to ¡ReceptacleName¿ • clean : ¡ItemName¿ with ¡ReceptacleName¿ • heat : ¡ItemName¿ with ¡ReceptacleName¿ • cool : ¡ItemName¿ with ¡ReceptacleName¿ • use : ¡ItemName¿ 

# Available skills: 

{skill info }

# Skill/Action Selection Guideline: 

{task guideline }{action check error }

• Honor the routing recommendation. If recommendation.type is ”skill”, set skill to that name and 

action to null. If recommendation.type is ”action”, set action to the raw action string and skill to null. Only deviate if impossible, and explain in reasoning. • Do not repeat the same action/skill if nothing happened or failed. • Prioritize using the provided skills .• For the selected skills, follow the Guidelines for your Parameter Bindings to ensure the skill is called correctly to achieve the intended effect. • If none of the skills are applicable, then select the action from the available actions. Please enter your action in a json format. 

21 Lifting Traces to Logic: Programmatic Skill Induction with Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks 

‘‘‘json { "reasoning": <thought on action selection based on overall goals, current states, and sub-goals; note if deviating from recommendation>, "skill": <The selected skill. Return null if none of the skills are applicable or if a raw action is recommended.>, "start_condition_evidence": <thought on the start conditions of the selected skill>, "pre_span_summary": <summary in natural language relevant events that occurred **before** the current skill/action begins...>, "intent": <the intent of the current skill/action, must stay self-contained>, "parameter_bindings": {<skill-param-1> : <value-1>, ... }, "action": <The selected action if using a raw action. If a skill is selected, set this field to null.> }‘‘‘ 

22