Title: Dual Hierarchical Dialogue Policy Learning for Legal Inquisitive Conversational Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14057v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:17:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Dual Hierarchical Dialogue Policy Learning for Legal Inquisitive Conversational Agents 

Xubo Lin 

Georgetown University 

xl524@georgetown.edu 

Zezhi Deng 

Georgetown University 

zd127@georgetown.edu 

Shihao Wang 

Georgetown University 

sw1379@georgetown.edu 

Grace Hui Yang 

Georgetown University 

Grace.yang@georgetown.edu 

Yang Deng 

Singapore Management University 

ydeng@smu.edu.sg 

Abstract 

Most existing dialogue systems are user-driven, primarily designed to fulfill user requests. However, in many critical real-world scenar-ios, a conversational agent must proactively ex-tract information to achieve its own objectives rather than merely respond. To address this gap, we introduce Inquisitive Conversational Agents (ICAs) and develop an ICA specifically tailored to U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments. We propose a Dual Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning framework featuring two cooperating RL agents, each with its own policy, to co-ordinate strategic dialogue management and fine-grained utterance generation. By learning when and how to ask probing questions, the agent emulates judicial questioning patterns and systematically uncovers crucial informa-tion to fulfill its legal objectives. Evaluations on a U.S. Supreme Court dataset show that our method outperforms various baselines across multiple metrics. It represents an important first step toward broader high-stakes, domain-specific applications. 1

1 Introduction 

Conversational AI has long focused on user-driven systems suited to tasks like customer service or digital assistants. They excel when the discourse is close-ended and user–driven. However, they are not well-suited when it comes to scenarios like court justices, where they do not passively absorb information; instead, they prod, reframe, and challenge, creating a line of inquiry that tests the attorney’s narrative and hunts for latent incon-sistencies. The dialogue has a moving target of questions and counters, and it is this information-seeking dynamic that we call inquisitive dialogue. Much of the literature that characterizes itself as “task-oriented dialogue” in fact captures only one slice of the space: collaborative dialogue 

> 1Git repository

where system and user share a goal. Datasets such as MultiWOZ (Budzianowski et al., 2020), Schema-Guided Dialogue (Rastogi et al., 2020), Taskmaster (Byrne et al., 2019), etc., canonize that slice by framing the agent as a benevolent assistant whose sole duty is to satisfy explicit user requests. Their well-formulated slot ontologies, crowd-written templates, and short conversational arcs make them ideal for supervised learning but si-multaneously ill-suited for settings where the agent, not the interlocutor, steers the agenda. Treating these resources as the entirety of task-oriented di-alogue (TOD), therefore, overstates their scope and leaves the inquisitive and negotiation spec-trum virtually unmapped, for example, in figure 1, the utterance "The Sixth Amendment only pro-tects your money up until the point where there’s a judgment?" is a task oriented question but will not appear in collaborative or negotiation dialogue. Inquisitive dialogue poses multiple challenges. First, initiative and relevance are context contin-gent: asking “Which soda do you prefer?” in an interview can be incisive or irrelevant depending on the preceding exchange, a nuance that tradi-tional conversational agents can struggle to capture. Second, the interaction horizon is long. Supreme Court transcripts routinely exceed 5 000 tokens per round, stretching the capacity of mainstream encoder–decoder models that underpin many col-laborative agents (Su et al., 2022; Shu et al., 2019). Additionally, the dialogue participants do not share a common goal, and in many cases may be actively working against each other to reach their own goals. Therefore, any agent participating in inquisitive dialogue must learn long-term dialogue and ques-tioning strategies in a non-cooperative context. To meet these challenges, we propose a Dual Hierarchical Reinforcement-Learning (RL) frame-work that splits inquisitive reasoning between two tightly coupled agents. An Appraisal Agent eval-uates each attorney’s response in real time and 

> arXiv:2605.14057v1 [cs.CL] 13 May 2026 Figure 1: While this paper focuses on inquisitive dia-logue in the context of U.S. Supreme Court hearings, we rethink and propose a broader categorization of task-oriented dialogue into three types: collaborative, negoti-ation(Lewis et al., 2017), and inquisitive. In prior works, non-collaborative types of TOD remain underexplored.

converts those judgments into scalar rewards that shape the next turn, then a Hierarchical Dialogue-Policy Agent regressively generates the up to 3 hierarchies of action based on the output from the Appraisal Agent. 

2 Related Work 

Proactive Conversational Agents. The devel-opment of conversational agents (CAs) has been largely driven by breakthroughs in natural lan-guage processing and machine learning. Key ap-proaches include sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) modeling (Sutskever et al., 2014), pretrained language models (PLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2024), retrieval-assisted text gen-eration (RAG) (Gao et al., 2024; Izacard and Grave, 2021), and reinforcement learning (RL) ap-proaches (Schulman et al., 2017). Among them, RL provides an optimization paradigm for dia-logue strategies, particularly in task-oriented set-tings (Budzianowski et al., 2020), where reward-based learning aligns agent behavior with desired outcomes. For instance, Li et al. (2016b) intro-duced deep RL to incorporate dialogue-level re-wards, while Zhao and Eskenazi (2016) proposed an end-to-end system that learns both dialogue state tracking and strategy. While conventional CAs typically respond to user-initiated requests, a growing line of research focuses on proactive conversational agents (Liao et al.), which actively initiate topics (Tang et al., 2019), provide context-aware recommenda-tions (Zhou et al., 2020), and guide users rather than simply reacting (Deng et al., 2023). Proac-tive agents often leverage reinforcement learn-ing (Deng et al., 2024), strategic planning (Zhang et al., 2024), or question generation (Guo et al., 2024) to address limitations of purely reactive sys-tems, enabling richer support for tasks such as ex-ploratory search and decision-making. ICAs take this concept even further by focusing on steering 

the conversation and gathering insights from the user to achieve the system’s own objectives. They go beyond offering guidance or recommendations and actively probe for information, making them especially suited to domains like legal or investiga-tive dialogues where deeper fact-finding is critical. 

Legal Conversational Agents. While much of the research on conversational agents has focused on open-domain or task-oriented contexts, a grow-ing body of work explores their application in the legal domain. For instance, Sharma et al. (2021) build a retrieval-based legal chatbot to address fre-quently asked legal questions. Although these sys-tems provide valuable assistance, they predomi-nantly adopt a reactive, FAQ-style approach, leav-ing vacancy for more proactive or inquisitive dia-logue models—an area our work aims to advance. 

3 Problem Formulation 

3.1 Inquisitive Conversations 

In this paper, we address the problem of inquisitive conversation , where a conversational agent actively probes for critical information to achieve its own objectives, rather than merely responding to user queries. Specifically, we frame this challenge in the context of Supreme Court judicial dialogue. Inquisitive conversations exhibit several key dif-ferences to everyday casual conversations. 

Conversational Control: In typical conversations, the user initiates queries and drives the topic. In judicial dialogues, the justice initiates each round of questioning and controls the direction of the discussion. 

Purpose: Casual dialogues often serve social or informative purposes, whereas in judicial question-ing, each question aims to clarify legal uncertainty, probe for consistency, or expose logical flaws. 

Strategy: Justice questioning is deliberate and strategic, employing techniques such as testing hy-potheticals, challenging premises, and verifying doctrinal consistency. To model these differences in inquisitive behav-ior, we propose the Inquisitive Conversational Agent (ICA) , which mimics these questioning pat-terns using a dual-agent hierarchical reinforcement learning framework. 3.2 Dialogue Formulation 

We model the justice–attorney interaction as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined by the tuple M = ( S, A, R, γ ), where S is the dialogue state space, A the action space, R the reward func-tion, and γ the discount factor. Each dialogue round t begins with a justice utterance utj , followed by an attorney response uta, forming an interaction pair (utj , u ta). The state st ∈ S encodes the dia-logue context up to round t.In our formulation, the justice utterance utj is treated as the action at, which transitions the envi-ronment to a new state st+1 after observing ut+1 

> a

and yields a scalar reward rt = R(st, a t).

Appraisal Signal: In inquisitive dialogue, agents operate with their own information-seeking goals. Rather than waiting for user input to guide the ex-change, they actively evaluate each response to determine whether it advances their investigative objective. To resonate with this feature of inquisi-tive dialogue, we introduce an appraisal signal pt at each turn. It encodes the justice’s judgment of the attorney’s prior response (e.g., evasive, incomplete, satisfactory) under dialogue state st. In our dataset, the appraisal of the justice in each turn t can be inferred from an utterance tuple of two rounds: 

pt = f



ut−1 

> j

, u ta, u tj



. (1) For instance, if the justice issues a near-identical utterance across two consecutive turns, it often indicates dissatisfaction with the attorney’s prior response. Accordingly, we augment the stan-dard transition tuple to D ∼ (st, p t, a t, r t, s t+1 ).The Appraisal Agent treats pt as the action se-lected in state st, while the Dialogue Agent op-erates on an augmented state representation st 

> aug

=

concat (st, p t). This design enables the Dialogue Agent to condition its next action on its internal assessment of that history as well. While many dialogue systems treat utterance generation as an open-ended natural language gen-eration (NLG) task with a vast action space (Zhao and Eskenazi, 2016; Sharma et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2022), domain-specific agents can often re-duce complexity by operating on a finite set of 

dialogue acts (Peng et al., 2018; Su et al., 2018). In the Supreme Court domain, for instance, justices frequently perform recurrent yet distinct high-level actions (e.g., asking questions, making hypothe-ses, or making declarations (Cichowicz, 2019)), which lend themselves to a more structured formu-lation. After they choose a high-level intent, such as questioning, hypothesizing, or declaring, they may refine it into a more specific subtype, like a probing or clarifying question before their actual utterance came up. Motivated by this, we adopt a hierarchical ac-tion space that separates policy decisions (i.e., 

which dialogue act to take next ) from the lower-level surface text realization (i.e., how to verbalize that act ). Our approach discretizes justices’ inter-actions into a three-level taxonomy (see Table 3 in appendix) that captures both top-level acts (e.g., a “question”) and their subtypes (e.g., probing for clarity vs. challenging an argument). 

3.3 Reward Definition 

Unlike conventional dialogue rewards that primar-ily assess the agent’s own utterance, our inquisi-tive setting focuses on how effectively the justice’s utterance elicits information from the attorney’s subsequent response . In this work, each justice’s utterance ut 

> j

receives a reward comprising the fol-lowing components. 

(1) Solicitation of Goal-Relevant Information. 

One objective of the agent in an inquisitive dia-logue is to gather useful and relevant information that is aligned with their goal. Therefore, we intro-duce a goal-relevance reward to incentivize prob-ing related to the agent’s goal. To capture how effectively the justice’s utterance, ut 

> j

, compels an attorney’s response, ut+1 a , to include legally sig-nificant information, we measure the attorney’s response’s relevance to the case’s conclusion C.Using Llama-3-8B (gra, 2024) as a semantic sim-ilarity evaluator, we compute the maximum sim-ilarity between the attorney’s response ut+1 a and each sub-conclusion C[i], with scores bounded by 5. Formally, 

Rt+1 rel (st, u t 

> j

) = max 



sim  C[i], u t+1 a



, (2) where C[i] denotes individual sub-conclusions of the case’s conclusion. This reward encourages jus-tice’s inquisitive utterances that steer the dialogue toward legally relevant insights. 

(2) Solicitation of Novel Information. A key goal of an ICA is not only to ask questions but to drive the conversation toward uncovering information that has not yet surfaced. To capture this behavior, we introduce a novelty reward that measures how Figure 2: System Architecture of the Proposed Dual Hierarchical Inquisitive Conversational Agent. 

effectively the justice’s utterance ut 

> j

prompts the at-torney’s next response ut+1 a to contribute new and informative content beyond what has already been discussed. This reward encourages the agent to for-mulate more strategic and context-aware inquiries that elicit additional legal details or perspectives. Formally, we compute this reward using the 

Expectation-Adjusted Distinct (EAD) metric (Liu et al., 2022), a length-normalized variant of 

Distinct-N (Li et al., 2016a) that evaluates lexical novelty while accounting for utterance length: 

Rt+1 nov (st, u t 

> j

) = N t+1 attorney 

V



1 −   V −1

> V

|ut+1 a |

 , (3) where N t+1 attorney represents the number of newly introduced tokens in ut+1 a that have not appeared in prior turns, 2 V is the cumulative vocabulary size up to time t, and | · | denotes the token count of the utterance. 

(3) Solicitation of Succinct Answer. In Supreme Court dialogues, justices often prefer brief, direct answers (e.g., “yes,” “no”) from the attorney (Ci-chowicz, 2019), as these answers can swiftly con-firm or deny a point and thus aid the justice’s decision-making. Additionally, succinct answers from the attorney helps the justice in keeping con-trol of the dialogue, and conversational control is an important consideration in making an ICA. We reward this succinctness, treating it as evidence that the justice’s utterance ut 

> j

was well-targeted: 

Rt+1 clarity (st, u t 

> j

) = − log  |ut+1 a |, (4) where |ut+1 a | is the token length of the attorney’s response. This measure complements the previous   

> 2In the original EAD (Liu et al., 2022), Ncounts distinct tokens; we adapt it to track newly introduced tokens relative to the dialogue history.

two components by explicitly encouraging clarity 

in judicial exchanges. During training, we combine the three reward components into an aggregated numerical reward via a weighted sum, which allows the agent to balance legal relevance, novelty, and clarity in its inquisitive dialogue. 

4 Proposed Method: A Dual-Agent Framework for Legal Inquiry 

Building an ICA, which actively uncovers informa-tion rather than merely answering queries, poses distinct challenges, especially in complex domains like Supreme Court hearings. To tackle this, we propose a Dual-Agent Hierarchical RL framework, depicted in Figure 2, designed to emulate the ju-dicial exchange process. Our approach comprises two coordinated agents, each focusing on a differ-ent aspect of the conversation. Rather than viewing dialogue as a single flat policy, we employ a three-level hierarchical RL dialogue agent that determines when to probe fur-ther, how to frame questions, and if the discussion should shift topics. By decomposing each turn into layers, ranging from broad subtopic planning to fine-grained utterance generation—the Dialogue Agent can optimize information elicitation while maintaining coherence and legal formality. 

4.1 Appraisal Agent 

We introduce a appraisal agent to evaluate each attorney response. If the response appears eva-sive, contradictory, or insufficiently detailed, the appraisal agent flags the need for deeper inquiry. This mechanism mimics a justice’s tendency to monitor counsel’s answers on the fly, ensuring that the Dialogue Agent adapts its questioning in real time rather than blindly following a predefined script. 

Why two agents? Separating response appraisal and dialogue control into two specialized agents enables more modular and interpretable decision-making. The Dialogue Agent focuses exclusively on planning and generating inquisitive moves, while the Appraisal Agent independently assesses whether the information obtained justifies contin-ued exploration. Similar to dialogue acts, the appraisals can be discretized for a specific domain as well. We sum-marized nine appraisal types from Supreme Court transcripts(see Table 4 in the appendix). These appraisals allow the justice to evaluate attorney re-sponses, identifying flaws, seeking clarification, or prompting further inquiry, and help ensure the dia-logue remains focused, responsive, and inquisitive. In our proposed method, Appraisal Agent em-ploys a Q-network to choose the appraisal p that maximizes its Q-value estimate: 

p(s) = arg max  

> p

QAppraisal (s, p ; θ), (5) where s is the current state embedding, and θ de-notes the Q-network parameters. The selected ap-praisal p is then represented as a one-hot vector and merged into the Dialogue Agent’s augmented state, guiding subsequent decisions to probe further or shift to the next subtopic as needed. In our dialogue agent, We augment the over-all dialogue state st with pt to yield st 

> aug

=

concat (st, p t) by treating the appraisal agent out-put as an internal state variable rather than a sepa-rate action, the ICA can better track whether deeper probing is needed or if the conversation should transition to a new subtopic. 

4.2 Dialogue Agent 

To emulate Supreme Court justices, our Hierarchi-cal Dialogue Agent first decides which conversa-tional act to perform (e.g., clarify, probe, or chal-lenge), then determines how to realize that act. We formalize these choices in a three-level action tax-onomy (Table 3). Level 1 defines high-level dia-logue acts, such as Questioning , Hypothesis Test-ing , or Declaration . Level 2 refines each act into subcategories (e.g., Clarification , Probing , Com-parison ), while Level 3 specifies the final utter-ance. 

Poincaré Embedding To capture the hierarchi-cal structure of judicial dialogue acts, we represent each action in a Poincaré embedding space (Nickel and Kiela, 2017). Poincaré embeddings are defined in a hyperbolic geometry that naturally preserves hierarchical and tree-like relationships, where par-ent nodes lie closer to the origin and child nodes are positioned exponentially farther away. By embed-ding our three-level taxonomy in this hyperbolic space, the Dialogue Agent can learn smoother tran-sitions across levels, leverage proximity for related actions (e.g., between sibling subacts), and better generalize across hierarchically related behaviors. The training target of it is as follows: 

L = X

> (u,v )∈D

log e−d(u,v )

P  

> v′∈N (u)

e−d(u,v ′) . (6) Where d(u, v ) denotes the hyperbolic distance between embeddings of nodes u and v; D is the set of observed positive pairs (e.g., parent–child or sibling relations) derived from the dialogue act hierarchy; and N (u) represents a set of negatively sampled nodes unrelated to u.

Multi-Hierarchy Action Selection. The three-level hierarchical action taxonomy (Table 3) al-lows our Dialogue Agent to operate at varying degrees of granularity. A single full-level action 

{a0, a 1, a 2} may yield up to three transition tu-ples: (s, a 0, r, s ′), (s, a 1, r, s ′), (s, a 2, r, s ′),

The agent may terminate at any level if the chosen sub-action has no additional children. The categories are chosen sequentially, where the highest level of action is chosen based on the augmented state, following a Level 2 action that is a subcategory of the chosen Level 1 action, and then the Level 3 action is chosen based on the Level 2 action in the same way. (e.g., choose ’question’ as a0, choose ’Probing question’ as a1, choose ’Probe the assumption’ as a2) Three levels of selec-tion steps correspond to the three transition tuples above. We use these actions to prompt LLM(gra, 2024) under a unified template6 to get a response for the Justice. 

4.3 Algorithm 

For both appraisal agent and dialogue agent, we use DDQN as the backbone, and the DDQN target for the appraisal agent is: 

YApp = r + γ Q 



s, arg max  

> p′

Q(s′, p ′; θApp ); θ−

> App



,

(7) where θApp and θ− 

> App

denote the weights of the main network and the target network. The respec-tive DDQN losses are: 

LDDQN App = E (s,p,s ′)∼D 

 Q(s, p ; θApp ) − YApp 

2,

(8) where θApp and θ− 

> App

denotes the weights of main network and target network of appraisal agent. For the dialogue agent, we train one Q-network that generates Q values of all possible next-level hierarchy actions sequentially conditioned on aug-mented states and parent actions. The DDQN tar-get of it is: 

Y l 

> Dia

= r + γ Q 



s, arg max  

> a′

Q(s′, a ′; θDia ); θ−

> Dia



,

(9) where θDia and θ− 

> Dia

denotes the weights of the main network and target network. We assume that the definition of dialogue actions in the dataset D is complete. For any single full-level action {a0, a 1, a 2}, we have: 

Q(s, a 0) = max 

> a1

Q(s, a 1)

Q(s, a 1) = max 

> a2

Q(s, a 2) (10) where a1 are all child actions of a0 and a2 are all child actions of a1. It means the Q-value of the parent action can be represented by the Q-value of the ’best’ child action. And the respective loss is 

Lhier Dia = ( Q(s, a 0) − max 

> a1

Q(s, a 1)) 2

+ ( Q(s, a 1) − max 

> a2

Q(s, a 2)) 2 (11) A well-documented challenge in offline rein-forcement learning is the overestimation of Q-values for state–action pairs that are insufficiently represented in the dataset (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020). To mitigate this issue in our setting, we introduce a simple yet effective con-servative regularization strategy. For each state 

s, we define R1(s) = max a∈A Q(s, a ), which corresponds to the maximum Q-value across all possible actions and is most likely to be overesti-mated. We penalize it by adding R1(s) to optimize objectives. However, when these high-Q actions are well represented in the dataset, applying the penalty uniformly can lead to underestimation. To address this, we introduce a compensatory term 

R2(s) = Q(s, a ), where (s, a ) ∈ D , to restore value estimates for observed transitions. The resulting regularization terms for the Ap-praisal and Dialogue Agents are defined as: 

LReg App = ( R1(s) − R2(s)) 

LReg Dia = ( R1(saug ) − R2(saug )) (12) These terms are incorporated into the final opti-mization objectives for both agents as follows: 

LApp = LDDQN App + αLReg App 

LDia = LDDQN Dia + βLReg Dia + λLhier Dia 

(13) Where α, β and λ are regularization coefficients. When (s, arg max a Q(s, a )) ∈ D, the reg-ulation term is equivalent to 0. When 

(s, arg max a Q(s, a )) /∈ D, it overestimate Q-value of (s, a ) ∈ D and underestimate (s, a ) pairs in R1. This regulatory term makes the derived policy lean towards the policy that generates the dataset D from the potentially overestimated val-ues. So by choosing appropriate α and β, we can reduce the variance without losing the perfor-mance. The implementation details of algorithm can be found in Appendix 1. 

5 Experiment 

5.1 Experiment Setup Dataset. We evaluate our work on the publicly available U.S. Supreme Court Oral Argument Transcript Dataset . In these transcripts, justices 

actively probe attorneys for information critical to deciding a case, closely reflecting the objec-tives of an ICA. Particularly, we use a subset of appeal court cases (spanning 1955–2023) from 

www.Oyez.org . Each transcript in this dataset contains metadata such as the case name, argument date, and speaker identifiers. The main textual con-tent comprises a background of the case , an ar-gued question , the complete dialogue transcript ,and the final conclusion . Table 5 in the appendix summarizes the distribution of cases across various legal domains. Our experiments are carried out 

offline , we divide our training and evaluation data by years when the argument happened. 

Evaluation Metrics. We employ two comple-mentary evaluation strategies to assess our sys-tem’s performance. We prompt a legally pretrained, SaulLM-7B (Colombo et al., 2024), to score each utterance generated by the agents (see Appendix 6 for the prompts). In parallel, we collect manual ratings from human reviewers, applying the same metrics to each utterance. We focus on the following metrics. Both the LLM and human judges assign scores on a 1–5 

scale, where higher values indicate stronger perfor-mance: 

Conformity Score (CS). Measures how closely each utterance {ui} reflects judicial norms (e.g., formality, legal phrasing). 

Progression Score (PS). Assesses whether ui ad-vances the discussion rather than stalling or di-gressing. 

Outcome Relevance Score (OS). Evaluates each utterance’s consistency with the broader objec-tive—such as reaching a legal conclusion or a co-herent final ruling. 

Probing Effectiveness Score (PES). Captures how effectively ui prompts new information from the interlocutor. 

Multi-turn Dialogue Metrics. We introduce two metrics to evaulate the multi-turn dialogue capa-bilities of the systems. We segment the original transcript from each case into topics and construct an attorney agent using SeCom (Pan et al., 2025), and the ICA and the attorney agent engages in a simulated courtroom debate based on the question from the case. The oral argument stage has a time limit; we set the maximum conversation length as 10 rounds to represent it. We compute a Coverage Score from the sim-ulated debate, which calculates how many of the topics in the original transcript was covered by the ICA. Let ti be the original topics, T be the set of topics from the simulated debate, and t′ 

> i

∈ T be a topic in the simulated debate. Then the Coverage Score is computed as follows: 

X

> t′
> i∈T

max 

> ti

(Sim (ti, t ′

> i

)) (14) We also introduce a Marginal Relevance (MR) Score , based on Maximal Marginal Relevance 

(Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998). The Marginal Relevance Score evaluates the ICA’s ability to probe for new information while staying relevant to the topic of debate. For every round of dialogue, let uj be the justice’s last utterance, and ui<j be the justice’s previous utterances. Let q be the ques-tion of the case, and n be the number of dialogue rounds. Then the Marginal Relevance Score is                                        

> CS PS OS PES Overall Vanilla Llama3 3.99 3.94 4.70 3.92 4.14 SFT Llama3 3.98 3.81 4.45 3.38 3.91 SaulLM-7B 4.01 3.91 4.56 3.75 4.06 Hudeˇ cek 3.99 3.97 4.77 3.63 4.09 VaRMI 4.00 3.94 4.71 3.93 4.15 ArCHer 3.96 3.79 4.17 4.22 4.04
> Ours 4.01 3.98 4.89 4.47 4.34
> Table 1: Main Experimental Results

computed as: 

1

n

X

> uj

γ(Sim (uj , q )) −(1 −γ) max 

> ui

(Sim (ui, u j )) 

(15) We use cosine similarity for Sim in both metrics. Additionally, we set γ = 0 .7 to reward the jus-tice for staying on topic, while still encouraging exploration of new topics. Together, these two metrics evaluate the abil-ity of the agents to cover all the necessary topics while probing for new information in multi-turn dialogues. 

Baselines. We compare our dual-agent hierarchi-cal RL approach against several representative con-versational systems. Vanilla Llama3 (gra, 2024) is a straightforward prompt-only approach, querying Llama3-8B-Instruct with no hierarchical actions or appraisals, thereby gauging the off-the-shelf ca-pabilities of an LLM on Supreme Court discourse. 

SFT Llama3 (gra, 2024) fine-tunes the same base model using our dataset, testing whether domain-specific training alone meets inquisitive dialogue demands. We also include SaulLM-7B (Colombo et al., 2024) to assess how specialized LLMs per-form when no hierarchical or appraisal mecha-nisms are present. For more structured pipeline approaches, Hudeˇ cek et al. (Hudeˇ cek and Dušek, 2023) integrates domain detection, belief-state tracking, and database querying for task-oriented dialogues, while VaRMI (Shea and Yu, 2023) em-ploys offline policy gradient and importance sam-pling to maintain role consistency in RL-based CAs. ArCHer (Zhou et al., 2024) utilizes a hier-archical structure with an Actor-Critic framework for multi-turn, goal-oriented dialogues. We em-ploy the offline variant. Further details on hyper-parameters and implementation are available in Appendix A. Figure 3: Coverage Score results 

> Figure 4: MR Score results

5.2 Main Results 

In this section, we test our method and all base-lines on the US Supreme Court dataset and com-pare their effectiveness in terms of the evaluation metrics. Detailed results are shown in Table 1. Our fine-tuning-free method achieves the best perfor-mance across all metrics, confirming that our dual agent method understands the goal of justice and its inquisitive nature well. The appraisal agent con-tributes to the PES metric the most, which is the metric where our method outperforms the baseline the most. It is worth noting that although the US Supreme Court transcript is included in the training set of SaulLM-7B, it is still outperformed by generic models. The reasons for this phenomenon are two-fold: first, the model wasn’t trained for dialogue tasks; second, the task is substantially more chal-                            

> CS PS OS PES Overall
> Full Model 4.01 3.98 4.89 4.47 4.34
> w/o Appraisal Agent
> 4.03 4.0 4.74 4.30 4.27 w/o Succinct Reward 4.01 3.97 4.85 4.39 4.31 w/o Novelty Reward 4.01 3.97 4.82 4.34 4.29 w/o Goal Relevance 4.00 3.97 4.83 4.32 4.28
> Table 2: Ablation Study

lenging than the metrics used for SaulLM-7B. The results of Coverage Score and MR Score 

are presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4. In Figure 3, our method consistently achieves the highest Cov-erage Score across all round settings, indicating that our dual-agent framework is more effective at expanding the discussion to cover a broader range of case-related topics. Figure 4 shows a similar pattern for MR Score: our method maintains the strongest marginal relevance throughout, suggest-ing that it is better able to introduce new infor-mation while remaining aligned with the central question of the case. Due to the quality issue of the Surpeme Court dataset, the finetuning methods are not efficient on the dataset(see examples in Table 7). SFT and ArCHer achieve ideal results in CS and PES, how-ever, their results were affected by the widespread presence of low-quality data, while our approach effectively bypasses low-quality snippets. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

We conducted four ablations to clarify the role of each reward component and the appraisal agent: (i) w/o the appraisal agent, (ii) w/o the succinct reward, (iii) w/o the novelty reward, and (iv) w/o the goal relevance reward. Table 2 shows that each omission reduces at least one key metric relative to our full model, which yields the highest overall score (4.34), confirming that all components contribute to overall effective-ness. For example, removing the novelty reward reduces OS from 4.34 to 4.29, suggesting that with-out encouraging fresh information, the dialogue risks becoming less directional. Figure 8a (130 epochs) and 8b (1600 epochs) plots the cumulative reward during offline RL. Early in training, the full model quickly surpasses ablations, reflecting the synergy of dual-agent over-sight and the combination of all reward signals. 5.4 Human Evaluation 

We conducted a human evaluation, giving anno-tators the metadata of each Supreme Court case along with its dialogue context. Evaluators scored the Conformity Score (CS), Progression Score (PS), Outcome Relevance Score (OS), and Probing Effectiveness Score (PES) on a 1–5 scale (Sec-tion 5.1). To ensure consistency, all methods were evaluated on the same set of case transcripts. Table 8 presents the average ratings. Our full model achieves the highest overall score (4.53), outperforming both SaulLM-7B (Colombo et al., 2024) and all ablated versions. This underscores the importance of every component in the agent in improving performance. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we revisit the scope of TOD and pro-pose a three-way categorization—collaborative, ne-gotiation, and inquisitive dialogue—to better cap-ture the diversity of goal-driven conversation. Our study centers on the inquisitive dialogue setting, using U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments as a rep-resentative domain. We presented a dual-agent hierarchical RL ap-proach for inquisitive conversation, focusing on U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments as a high-stakes domain. By integrating a Hierarchical Dia-logue Agent that decomposes conversation control across multiple levels with an Appraisal Agent that proactively evaluates attorney responses, our framework captures the justice’s goal-driven and probing style. We also present a regulation term that efficiently reduce the variance of our offline RL method. Empirical results on diverse Supreme Court cases show that the dual-agent design, cou-pled with carefully designed reward components yields more effective and context-aware dialogue strategies than multiple baselines. While our current work centers on Supreme Court interactions, the underlying principles, such as active inquiry, structured dialogue manage-ment, and reward-driven question formulation, are broadly applicable to other high-stakes or domain-specific settings where deeper questioning is cru-cial. Future directions include expanding the re-ward model to capture even more nuanced legal strategies, and adapting the framework to other in-quisitive domains such as investigative journalism or medical consultations. 

7 Limitation 

The simulated justice’s responses of our agents are given by prompting LLM. Our agent’s capability is heavily relies on capability of LLM. When LLMs have a very low probability of generating the de-sired optimal sequence, our method cannot reach optimal performance as well. Although our work outperforms other baselines on the US Supreme Court dataset, the efficiency of our method on other legal domain dialogue datasets remains unclear. Our reward signals and action types are set for this dataset; for other datasets, they have to be redesigned. The policy of generating the US Supreme Court dataset is close to the optimal policy. When the dataset contains a large amount of data generated by a bad policy, our regularization term could be less efficient. 

8 Ethical statement 

This study uses publicly available transcripts and metadata from U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments, all of the original format of data can be download from Official website(Supreme Court of the United States). The Court releases transcripts as part of its routine transparency practices. These datasets do not reveal any identifiable information about the raters. We are not asking for any personal in-formation during the labeler selection and labeling process. We do not include any personalized in-formation in data processing. All of the examples used in prompting are randomly selected. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by U.S. National Sci-ence Foundation grant number IIS-2336768. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda-tions expressed in this paper are of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsor. 

References     

> 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.21783. Paweł Budzianowski, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Bo-Hsiang Tseng, Iñigo Casanueva, Stefan Ultes, Osman Ra-madan, and Milica Gaši´ c. 2020. Multiwoz - a large-scale multi-domain wizard-of-oz dataset for task-oriented dialogue modelling. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00278 .Bill Byrne, Karthik Krishnamoorthi, Chinnadhurai Sankar, Arvind Neelakantan, Daniel Duckworth,

Semih Yavuz, Ben Goodrich, Amit Dubey, Andy Cedilnik, and Kyu-Young Kim. 2019. Taskmaster-1: Toward a realistic and diverse dialog dataset. 

Preprint , arXiv:1909.05358. J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-search and Development in Information Retrieval ,pages 335–336, Melbourne, Australia. ACM. Corinne Cichowicz. 2019. Oral argument tactics on the supreme court bench: A comparative analysis of verbal tools used by justices sotomayor, kagan, and gorsuch. Pierre Colombo, Telmo Pessoa Pires, Malik Boudiaf, Dominic Culver, Rui Melo, Caio Corro, Andre F. T. Martins, Fabrizio Esposito, Vera Lúcia Raposo, Sofia Morgado, and Michael Desa. 2024. Saullm-7b: A pioneering large language model for law. Preprint ,arXiv:2403.03883. Yang Deng, Lizi Liao, Liang Chen, Hongru Wang, Wenqiang Lei, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2023. Prompt-ing and evaluating large language models for proac-tive dialogues: Clarification, target-guided, and non-collaboration. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 10602–10621. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yang Deng, Wenxuan Zhang, Wai Lam, See-Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. Plug-and-play policy planner for large language model powered dialogue agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 . OpenRe-view.net. Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. 2019. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without ex-ploration. Preprint , arXiv:1812.02900. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2024. Retrieval-augmented gener-ation for large language models: A survey. Preprint ,arXiv:2312.10997. Shasha Guo, Lizi Liao, Jing Zhang, Cuiping Li, and Hong Chen. 2024. PCQPR: proactive conversational question planning with reflection. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024 , pages 11266–11278. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Vojtˇ ech Hudeˇ cek and Ondˇ rej Dušek. 2023. Are llms all you need for task-oriented dialogue? Preprint ,arXiv:2304.06556. Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Lever-aging passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2007.01282. Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. 2020. Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning. Preprint , arXiv:2006.04779. Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N. Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. Preprint ,arXiv:1706.05125. Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016a. A diversity-promoting ob-jective function for neural conversation models. In 

Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 110–119, San Diego, California. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016b. Deep rein-forcement learning for dialogue generation. Preprint ,arXiv:1606.01541. Lizi Liao, Grace Hui Yang, and Chirag Shah. Proactive conversational agents in the post-ChatGPT world. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SI-GIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 3452–3455. ACM. Na Liu, Liangyu Chen, Xiaoyu Tian, Wei Zou, Kai-jiang Chen, and Ming Cui. 2024. From llm to con-versational agent: A memory enhanced architecture with fine-tuning of large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2401.02777. Siyang Liu, Sahand Sabour, Yinhe Zheng, Pei Ke, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. 2022. Rethink-ing and refining the distinct metric. Preprint ,arXiv:2202.13587. Maximilian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. 2017. Poincaré embeddings for learning hierarchical representations. 

Preprint , arXiv:1705.08039. Zhuoshi Pan, Qianhui Wu, Huiqiang Jiang, Xufang Luo, Hao Cheng, Dongsheng Li, Yuqing Yang, Chin-Yew Lin, H. Vicky Zhao, Lili Qiu, and Jianfeng Gao. 2025. On memory construction and retrieval for personalized conversational agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.05589. Baolin Peng, Xiujun Li, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing Liu, Kam-Fai Wong, and Shang-Yu Su. 2018. Deep dyna-q: Integrating planning for task-completion dialogue policy learning. Preprint , arXiv:1801.06176. Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, and 1 others. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-ers. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9. Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, and Pranav Khaitan. 2020. To-wards scalable multi-domain conversational agents: The schema-guided dialogue dataset. Preprint ,arXiv:1909.05855. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms. Preprint ,arXiv:1707.06347. Mudita Sharma, Tony Russell-Rose, Lina Barakat, and Akitaka Matsuo. 2021. Building a legal dialogue system: Development process, challenges and oppor-tunities. Preprint , arXiv:2109.00381. Shikhar Sharma, Jing He, Kaheer Suleman, Hannes Schulz, and Philip Bachman. 2017. Natural lan-guage generation in dialogue using lexicalized and delexicalized data. Preprint , arXiv:1606.03632. Ryan Shea and Zhou Yu. 2023. Building persona con-sistent dialogue agents with offline reinforcement learning. Preprint , arXiv:2310.10735. Lei Shu, Piero Molino, Mahdi Namazifar, Hu Xu, Bing Liu, Huaixiu Zheng, and Gokhan Tur. 2019. Flexibly-structured model for task-oriented dia-logues. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual SIG-dial Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue , Stockholm, Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shang-Yu Su, Xiujun Li, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing Liu, and Yun-Nung Chen. 2018. Discriminative deep Dyna-Q: Robust planning for dialogue policy learn-ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 3813–3823, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yixuan Su, Lei Shu, Elman Mansimov, Arshit Gupta, Deng Cai, Yi-An Lai, and Yi Zhang. 2022. Multi-task pre-training for plug-and-play task-oriented dia-logue system. Preprint , arXiv:2109.14739. Supreme Court of the United States. Official Website of the U.S. Supreme Court. Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. 

Preprint , arXiv:1409.3215. Jianheng Tang, Tiancheng Zhao, Chenyan Xiong, Xi-aodan Liang, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2019. Target-guided open-domain conversation. In Pro-ceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019 , pages 5624–5634. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2024. Improv-ing text embeddings with large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2401.00368. Weizhi Wang, Zhirui Zhang, Junliang Guo, Yinpei Dai, Boxing Chen, and Weihua Luo. 2022. Task-oriented dialogue system as natural language generation. In 

Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , SIGIR ’22. ACM. Tong Zhang, Chen Huang, Yang Deng, Hongru Liang, Jia Liu, Zujie Wen, Wenqiang Lei, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. Strength lies in differences! improving strategy planning for non-collaborative dialogues via diversified user simulation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024 , pages 424–444. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tiancheng Zhao and Maxine Eskenazi. 2016. To-wards end-to-end learning for dialog state tracking and management using deep reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:1606.02560. Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and Yongqiang Ma. 2024. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstra-tions) , Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Kun Zhou, Yuanhang Zhou, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xi-aoke Wang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2020. Towards topic-guided conversational recommender system. In Pro-ceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2020 , pages 4128–4139. International Committee on Computa-tional Linguistics. Yifei Zhou, Andrea Zanette, Jiayi Pan, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. Archer: Training language model agents via hierarchical multi-turn rl. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.19446. 

A Implementation details 

Implementation Details. We define the agent’s 

state S at each time step as the dialogue context up to the current turn. We transform the components into a dense vector, S = Embed (sc, s h), using a fine-tuned Mistral-7B model (Wang et al., 2024). Our embedding model produces 4096-dimensional vectors. In both the hierarchical dialogue agent and reward model, we compress these embeddings to 32 dimensions before concatenating them with appraisals and actions. This compression uses fully connected layers with batch normalization and Leaky ReLU activations. During training, our Dual Hierarchical Dialogue Agent relies on ground-truth appraisal and three hierarchies from the dataset, so the appraisal agent and three hierarchies of dialogue agent can be trained simultaneously while loading the same dataset. To stabilize training, we employ polyak updates of the target networks with τ = 0 .005 , and empiri-cally set the discount factor γ to 0.9. The weights for relevance, novelty, and succinctness rewards are set to 0.2, 0.7, and 0.1, respectively. We use exponential decay for learning rate of both agents; the learning rates for them are 1e-6 to 3e-9 and 1e-6 to 1e-8. The model size for both appraisal agent and dialogue policy agent are both less than 2M, the whole training time takes approximately 70 hours. Our method, ablations, SFT Llama3, VaRMI, Hudeˇ cek’s method, and the vanilla baseline, use Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct as their base model. For ArCHer, the actor uses Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct as the base model due to memory constraints, and the critic uses RoBERTa, in line with the implementa-tion presented by the authors. We run SFT Llama3 via LLaMA-Factory (Zheng et al., 2024) on 2,000 examples from the Supreme Court dataset, training for three epochs with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) at a per-device batch size of 4, a gradient accumu-lation step of 8, and a learning rate of 1e−4. For VaRMI (Shea and Yu, 2023), we fine-tune with a 

1e−6 learning rate for one epoch. In Hudeˇ cek’s method (Hudeˇ cek and Dušek, 2023), the training dataset serves as the retrieval database, and cosine similarity on embedded contexts is used as the re-trieval similarity function. For ArCHer, we train with a dataset of 700 dialogue trajectories, each with 6 to 7 dialogue turns, for 8 epochs, with an actor learning rate of 1e − 4 and a critic learning rate of 1e − 5.

Inference Phase. At inference, the Appraisal Agent is invoked first to generate an appraisal, which is subsequently fed into the dialogue agent. The dialogue agent first selects a top-level macro-action and then refines it through second- and third-level choices according to Table 3, stopping if the current sub-action has no successor. Formally, each level l solves: 

al = arg max 

> al

Q(l) saug , a 0, . . . , a l−1, a l

. (16) The final action vector {a0, a 1, a 2} thus encodes a context-aware dialogue strategy, navigating the conversation at multiple levels of granularity . 

A.1 Reward Model for Offline Evaluation 

In this work, we use an offline RL setting, and the environment is not accessible for providing real-time feedback. We thus learn a Reward Model to approximate the environment’s true reward func-tion from the offline training data. Particularly, we employ a feed-forward neural network (FFN) to model Rϕ and predict a scalar reward ˆr. The net-work takes data tuples of (s, p, a, r ) ∼ D . A stan-dard mean-squared error (MSE) loss is used here to measure the discrepancy between the predicted reward ˆr = Rϕ

 z, p, a  and the ground-truth ri.

B Three-Level Taxonomy of Justice’s Action 

The hierarchies of dialogue actions are listed in Table 3. Actions in primary hierarchies are bolded. Actions in second and third hierarchies are listed in the left and right columns of the table, respectively. Algorithm 1 Dual Hierarchical RL (Offline Training Mode with Regularization) 

Input: dataset D ∼ (( s, p ), a, r, s ′)

Output: Policies for dual agent θApp and θDia 

1: Initialization: Build dataset {(s, p, r, s ′)} for appraisal agent, { (( s, p, a 0, . . . , a l−1), a l, r, s ′) | l ∈ { 0, 1, 2} } for hierarchical agent, {(s, p, a, r )} for reward model. Initialize policy and target networks Qθ

> App

, QDia , and reward model 

Rϕ.

Train Reward Model: 

2: for each training iteration do 

3: Sample mini-batch (s, p, a, r )

4: Update Rϕ by minimizing LRM = E(s,p,a,r )∼D 

h

(ˆ r − r)2

i

5: end for when Rϕ converges 

Train Appraisal Agent: 

6: for each training iteration do 

7: Sample (s, p, r, s ′)

8: Compute DDQN target: Y = r + γQ App (s′, arg max p′ QApp (s′, p ′; θ); θ−)

9: Compute regularization terms: R1(s) = max p′ QApp (s, p ′), R2(s) = QApp (s, p ) where (s, p ) ∈ D 

10: Update QApp by minimizing: LApp = ( QApp (s, p ) − y)2 + α(R1(s) − R2(s)) 

11: end for when QApp converges 

Train Hierarchical Dialogue Agent: 

12: for each training iteration do 

13: Sample transitions { (( s, p, a 0, . . . , a l−1), a l, r, s ′) | l ∈ { 0, 1, 2} } from D

14: Compute DDQN target: yl = r + γ Q Dia (s′, arg max p′ QDia (s′, p ′; θ); θ−)

15: Compute conservative terms: R1(saug ) = max p′ QDia (saug , p ′), R2(saug ) = QDia (saug , p )

16: Compute Q(s, a 0), max a1 Q(s, a 1), Q (s, a 1), max a2 Q(s, a 2) (depends one hierarchy depth) 17: Update QDia based on accumulate regularized loss: L = P3 

> i=1

Ll, where Ll = ( QDia (saug , p ) − yl)2 + β(R1(saug ) −

R2(saug )) 

18: Offline evaluation: ˆr = E(s,p,a,r )∼D Rϕ(s, p ∗, a ∗ 

> 0

, a ∗ 

> 1

, a ∗ 

> 2

)

19: end for when L converges and ˆr stabilizes Question 

Clarification question 

Clarify important aspect of the case Clarify legal arguments or issues Clarify definition of concept 

Probing question Probe the consistency between the attorney’s arguments and established legal principles or precedents Probe the assumption underlying the attorney’s arguments 

Leading question 

Ask for the attorney’s position Lead the attorney toward a particular conclusion Lead the attorney to certain aspects 

Make hypothesis 

Present hypothesis Present hypothetical situations to test legal limits Present hypothetical situations to test legal issues in the case 

Compare hypothesis Compare to hypothetical situations to assess legal principles Highlight key differences from hypothetical situations 

Conclude hypothesis Explore different types of consequences 

Declaration 

Confirmation Acknowledge the attorney’s arguments Prompt for information that would support the attorney’s arguments 

Rejection Oppose the attorney’s arguments Provide counterexample to challenge the attorney’s argu-ments 

Declaration (non-questions) for more details 

Lead attorneys by examples (non-questions) for detailed ex-planation of a concept 

Declaration with Time Pressure Pressure a rash response from the attorney 

> Table 3: Proposed Hierarchy of Dialogue Acts

Appraisals Explanation 

Sense ambi-guity The justice finds the attorney’s ar-guments ambiguous Find devi-ates The justice believes the conversa-tion has strayed into irrelevant ter-ritory or unproductive arguments Find redun-dancy The justice finds the attorney’s ar-guments repetitive or unproductive Spot weak-ness The justice spots a weakness in the attorney’s arguments Identify flaws The justice identifies logical flaws in the attorney’s arguments Identify chances The justice identifies chances to influence the attorney Keep chal-lenging The justice wants to challenge the attorney from another aspect Dive deeper The Justice wants to dive deeper into the dialogue Otherwise All other kinds of the justice in-tents 

Table 4: Appraisal Actions                                          

> Domain Turns/case Words/utter Words/case #Cases
> Regulatory 192.6 47.7 9183.2 589 Civil Rights 206.0 44.0 9074.5 337 Criminal 200.6 45.0 9035.7 418 IP 173.4 52.5 9101.2 19 Commerce 199.3 46.4 9252.2 107 Labor 262.3 54.9 14407.3 101 Immigration 176.4 55.3 9762.3 16 Environment 262.3 54.9 14407.3 3Others 200.4 47.6 9541.2 18
> Total 198.6 45.9 9121.5 1608

Table 5: Supreme Court Dataset Statistics C Details Regards Measurements 

We have qualified students for making human eval-uations; we collect our human evaluation results by distributing Google Forms. The estimated payment is 20$ per hour. 

Component Prompt 

Instruction You are a duteous, respectful, and honest AI justice assistant. You are given a clip of dialogue that happens on the US supreme court appeal case ending with the utterance of the justice, your job is provide analysis and score the last utterance of the justice in the dialogue from different aspect with the max score of 5. In each task, you are given the background, argued question of the case, conclusion of the case and the justice utter-ance with related dialogue context. Provide a snippet of analysis to analyze the role of the last sentence before giving out the score. Metric Explanation The metric is: {Metric}: {Explanation of metric} The scoring format should be: {Metric}: {Comment about {metric}} ?/5 Score Definition The definition of scores are: Score 1/5 ({Descriptor}): {Explanation} Score 2/5 ({Descriptor}): {Explanation} Score 3/5 ({Descriptor}): {Explanation} Score 4/5 ({Descriptor}): {Explanation} Score 5/5 ({Descriptor}): {Explanation} 

Table 6: Prompt Structure for LLM Evaluation 

Figure 5: A template of google form for manual label-ing, text has been streamlined for typographical pur-poses. Figure 6: Justice uses a counterexample to challenge the attorney’s position and the arguments presented previously 

Figure 7: Justice continuously pressing attorney by making the rapid succession of her questions, cuts off attorney and then restricts him to one-word responses before another question is initiated. 

D Transferability Discussion 

Here, we provide a discussion of how the frame-work could be adapted to other inquisitive domains. Inquisitive conversations usually have an ulti-mate result. For the Supreme Court, it is a con-clusion; for journalism, it is a summary; and for medical interviews, it can be highlights. 

Appraisal taxonomy: To adapt to other do-mains, we can keep the same turn-level ap-praisal mechanism, but broaden the label space to a domain-general core plus domain-specific refinements. For journalism, refinements em-phasize attribution and verifiability (e.g., “claim lacks source,” “timeline inconsistent,” “needs ev-    

> Problem Snippet
> Sub-optimal utterance Attorney: So I – so I don’t think there’s any statement in the legislative history that says we’re not forcing employers to give benefits for non-work-related injuries. What – there are three statements in the legislative history that – that Respondent draws a negative in-ference from. Justice: I’m so relieved. Frequently interception Justice: So you really can’t... there’s no ana-lytical distinction, then– Attorney: Well– Justice: –between the fact and the feeling. Attorney: –That’s why we believe this should be a question for the district judge, who can balance all of these factors. In your hypothetical– Justice: Yes, but even on your balancing theory I thought the judge was supposed to draw... maybe I misunderstood you. Ithought the judge was supposed to draw a line between fact and feeling, and what he was supposed to be balancing– Attorney: –No, I– Justice: –was the appropriateness of admit-ting the fact as against other interests. Attorney: –I think that’s one of the things that the trial judge could be balancing, whether it’s fact or feeling, but also the need for the evidence. If we had a hypothetical where the– Justice: I don’t understand that, the need for the evidence? Missing data Attorney: That’s correct. It may be applied in the discretion of the agency head... Justice: (Inaudible) Attorney: Yes, sir, I think there is a substan-tial difference and I think that’s ...

Table 7: Examples of Low-quality Snippets of Dataset 

idence/documents”). For medicine, refinements emphasize clinical completeness and safety (e.g., “missing onset/duration/severity,” “red-flag unad-dressed,” “contraindication risk”). Practically, the domain-specific appraisal set can be selected from a larger universal pool, or induced with weak su-pervision/clustering over (question, answer, follow-up) triples—reducing reliance on handcrafted legal notions while preserving the same control interface to the dialogue policy. 

Dialogue act hierarchy: The hierarchical deci-sion structure can be broadened to a general prop-erty of inquisitive interviewing. Adaptation does not require redesigning the hierarchy; it requires swapping the act inventory. In journalism, high-level acts like clarify, verify, challenge, request ev-idence, reconcile contradictions, summarize leads naturally decompose into finer acts (e.g., “ask for document,” “ask for source identity,” “pin down time/place”). (a) First 130 epochs (b) First 1600 epochs 

Figure 8: Learning Curves from Ablation Study. (a) Cumulative reward during early training stage; (b) Cumulative reward extends to longer term training (1600 epochs). The full model (blue) outperforms all ablated versions.                                  

> CS PS OS PES Overall
> Full Model 3.99 4.53 4.32 4.63 4.37
> w/o Appraisal Agent 3.83 3.89 4.42 3.89 4.01 w/o Succinct Reward 3.45 4.05 4.11 4.05 3.92 w/o Novelty Reward 3.74 4.32 4.26 4.37 4.17 w/o Goal Relevance 3.77 4.26 4.21 4.42 4.17 SaulLM-7B 3.73 3.21 4.05 33.5

Table 8: Human Evaluation 

Rather than hand-crafting these for each new domain, a practical adaptation path is to derive the hierarchy via hierarchical clustering of ques-tion/response embeddings or other cues, then map clusters to interpretable parent nodes while letting leaves remain domain-specific. 

Reward design: The reward template also gen-eralizes with a simple substitution: replace the Supreme Court “case conclusion” target with a do-main “goal artifact” that represents the interview’s intended end product. For journalism, this can be a set of story claims/summarization of a dialogue. For medical interviews, this can be a set of high-lights of it. Generally speaking, goal-relevance then rewards answers that add content aligned with these goal elements, novelty rewards information that was not already established earlier in the conversation, and clarity is recalibrated per domain (journalism: specificity and attribution/evidence presence). Cru-cially, the training objective and reward combina-tion remain unchanged—only the goal artifact and clarity proxy are swapped in this way, adaptation can be interpreted as a “plug-in” process rather than a substantial redesign.