Title: InfoSeeker: A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02971v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:51:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# INFO SEEKER : A S CALABLE HIERARCHICAL PARALLEL AGENT 

# FRAMEWORK FOR WEB INFORMATION SEEKING 

Ka Yiu Lee †1 , Yuxuan Huang †2 , Zhiyuan He †1 , Huichi Zhou †3 , Weilin Luo 1, Kun Shao 1, Meng Fang 2 and Jun Wang 31 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 University of Liverpool 3 University College London April 6, 2026 

## ABSTRACT 

Recent agentic search systems have made substantial progress by emphasising deep, multi-step reasoning. However, this focus often overlooks the challenges of wide-scale information synthesis, where agents must aggregate large volumes of heterogeneous evidence across many sources. As a result, most existing large language model agent systems face severe limitations in data-intensive settings, including context saturation, cascading error propagation, and high end-to-end latency. To address these challenges, we present InfoSeeker, a hierarchical framework based on principle of near-decomposability, containing a strategic Host , multiple Managers and parallel Workers . By leveraging aggregation and reflection mechanisms at the Manager layer, our framework enforces strict context isolation to prevent saturation and error propagation. Simultaneously, the parallelism in worker layer accelerates the speed of overall task execution, mitigating the significant latency. Our evaluation on two complementary benchmarks demonstrates both efficiency ( 3 − 5× speed-up) and effectiveness, achieving a 8.4% success rate on WideSearch-en and 52 .9% accuracy on BrowseComp-zh. The code is released at https://github.com/agent-on-the-fly/InfoSeeker .

Figure 1: Performance results on BrowseComp-zh (avg) and WideSearch (avg/max). 

## 1 Introduction 

As Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to evolve [Zhao et al., 2023], the paradigm of web search is shifting from simple information retrieval to autonomous agentic web search [Yang et al., 2025b]. Users are no longer satisfied with simple multi-hop question answering. Instead, they require models capable of processing data-intensive and 

> arXiv:2604.02971v1 [cs.AI] 3 Apr 2026

InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

long-horizon tasks, such as Deep Research [Huang et al., 2025]. Consequently, the community has largely focused on optimising agents for multi-step reasoning and complex logical chains [Mialon et al., 2024, Wei et al., 2025, Zhou et al., 2025], witnessing a proliferation of architectures designed to maximise performance on these depth-oriented benchmarks [Google, 2025, OpenAI, 2025, Hu et al., 2025]. However, benchmarks such as WideSearch reveals critical deficiencies in current LLM agents when applied to large-scale information seeking, specifically regarding incomplete planning, lack of reflection, and the misuse of retrieved evidence [Wong et al., 2025]. We observed similar patterns in our pilot experiments: when a task requires aggregating data across dozens of web pages, the context windows of traditional frameworks (e.g., Gemini DeepResearch [Google, 2025]) saturate almost immediately, leading to failure. Meanwhile, sequential agent frameworks like MiroThinker [Team et al., 2025] and WebSailor [Li et al., 2025], which rely on ReAct-style loops [Yao et al., 2023], encounter severe error accumulation, as early mistakes tend to compound over time. Lastly, these sequential frameworks result in unacceptable time delays, severely limiting their efficiency. Building on these observations, we argue that simply expanding context windows or model capacity cannot fundamen-tally resolve the challenges of wide-scale information seeking. Inspired by Near-decomposability [Simon, 1991], which posits that complex systems function best when divided into semi-autonomous modules. In this structure, subsystems operate independently on details (short-run independence) and coordinate only through high-level summaries (long-run dependence). We propose InfoSeeker, a hierarchical framework comprising three distinct layers: a strategic Host 

that maintains compressed global state and plans high-level directives, domain-specific Managers that decompose these directives, verify quality, and aggregate results and a Worker layer. Crucially, this design unlocks massively parallel execution at the Worker level: multiple workers execute atomic tool interactions via the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [Soria Parra and Spahr-Summers, 2025] simultaneously. By isolating these concurrent execution streams and propagating only concise summaries upward, our hierarchy effectively mitigates context saturation, error propagation and latency. We empirically evaluate InfoSeeker on two complementary benchmarks: BrowseComp-zh (Depth & Chinese) [Zhou et al., 2025] and WideSearch (Width & English & Chinese) [Wong et al., 2025]. Results demonstrate that InfoSeeker achieves superior performance, securing a 66 .7% improvement in task success on WideSearch and a 13 .8% accuracy gain on BrowseComp-zh. Notably, it outperforms state-of-the-art commercial baselines, including Gemini Deep Research [Google, 2025] and OpenAI Deep Research [OpenAI, 2025]. Crucially, our parallel architecture also delivers significant efficiency gains, achieving an approximately 3 − 5× speed-up in inference latency compared to sequential execution. 

## 2 Related Work 

In recent years, agentic search [Huang et al., 2025] has evolved alongside LLMs, moving from conventional web search and LLM-enhanced retrieval-augmented generation [Press et al., 2023, Khattab et al., 2022, Gao et al., 2023] to search agents characterised by autonomous planning and multi-round querying [Chen et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2025b]. Rather than limiting themselves to single-turn query rewriting, contemporary systems construct parallel, sequential, or hybrid search structures conditioned on user intent and environmental context [Ahluwalia et al., 2024]. By iteratively refining queries in response to dynamic feedback [Chan et al., 2024, Madaan et al., 2023], these agents effectively achieve inference-time compute scaling through the test-time expansion of search. 

Agentic Workflow Orchestration. Building upon foundational tool-augmented frameworks such as WebGPT [Nakano et al., 2021] and ReAct [Yao et al., 2023], contemporary deep research agents, notably GPT-Researcher [Elovic, 2023] and Open Deep Search [LangChain AI, 2025], decompose complex queries into granular subtasks, evaluated by emerging benchmarks like DeepResearchGym [Coelho et al., 2025]. Orchestration has further evolved towards compiling goals into executable graphs via MCTS-guided search [Zhang et al., 2025a] or evolutionary workflows [Niu et al., 2025]. Whilst production-grade frameworks like AutoGen [Wu et al., 2024] and LangGraph [LangChain AI, 2024] provide essential abstractions, they primarily optimise workflows offline, offering limited runtime control over active graphs. Consequently, they lack support for real-time replanning and cross-branch compute reallocation. 

Parallel Reasoning and Execution. Parallel execution is a vital lever for mitigating the latency of agentic search. At the token and action levels, speculative decoding [Leviathan et al., 2023, Miao et al., 2023, Cai et al., 2024] and speculative reasoning [Pan et al., 2025, Yang et al., 2025a] reduce inference time via draft-and-verify and multi-token prediction. At the reasoning level, Dynamic Parallel Tree Search [Ding et al., 2025] accelerates tree-of-thought exploration, whilst ParaThinker [Wen et al., 2025] and Parallel-R1 [Zheng et al., 2025] instil native parallel reasoning capabilities. Flash-Searcher [Qin et al., 2025] and FlashResearch [Nie et al., 2025] further employ DAG-based execution and dynamic tree decomposition to parallelise complex sub-tasks. Whilst these approaches improve efficiency, they still assume static branching and fixed reasoning structures. InfoSeeker instead lifts parallelism to the workflow level with a three-tier 

2InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking User Query Reason & Plan Dispatch to Managers      

> Host Agent
> Re -Plan
> Manager Agent Layer
> Tra j-level
> Response
> Search Manager
> Browser Manager
> Filesystem Manager
> Code Manager
> Decompose Dispatch Aggregation
> & Summary
> Reflect &
> Verify
> Search Workers Browser Workers File Workers Code Workers
> Worker Agent
> Layer
> Answer
> Step -level
> Response

Figure 2: Overview of the InfoSeeker framework. The system features a three-tier topology consisting of a strategic Host, domain-specific Managers, and tool-executing Workers. By enforcing hierarchical context isolation, high-level directives ( qt) are decomposed into parallelisable subtasks ( qkt ) by Managers and executed by Workers. Final results are aggregated into concise summaries ( yt) to support long-horizon planning while preventing context exhaustion at the strategic level. hierarchy, enabling speculative branch expansion with real-time pruning or escalation. With a MapReduce-style pattern and MCP-based context isolation, it separates reasoning depth from execution width, scaling to long horizons within bounded contexts. 

## 3 Framework 

We propose InfoSeeker, a hierarchical system based on near-decomposability. Figure 2 depicts its three-tier topology: a strategic Host , Managers for parallel orchestration, and Workers for tool interaction. This design utilises the MCP to enforce context isolation, allowing the system to scale reasoning depth and execution width independently while maintaining bounded contexts. 

3.1 Hierarchical Architecture 

InfoSeeker adopts a three-layer hierarchical architecture consisting of a host agent ˆA, a set of domain-specific manager agents { ˜A}, and their associated worker agents { ¯A}. Algorithm 1 summarises the end-to-end execution workflow of InfoSeeker, illustrating how an initial user query is sequentially decomposed by the host, executed through domain-specific managers and their worker pools, and progressively abstracted into concise results that guide subsequent planning steps. 

Host agent. Given an initial user query Q, the host agent ˆA performs high-level, sequential reasoning. It maintains a context 

ˆCt−1 = ( Q, q 0, y 0, q 1, y 1, . . . , q t−1, y t−1), (1) where each qi denotes a high-level step generated by the host and each yi is the corresponding response returned by a manager. At iteration t, conditioned on the current context, the host generates the next step and if execution is not finished, a manager ˜At is selected to solve qt and returns a step-level result yt,

3InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Algorithm 1 InfoSeeker Execution Workflow  

> 1:

Input: Initial query Q, Host ˆA, Managers { ˜A}, Workers { ¯A} 

> 2:

Output: Final response y∗ 

> 3:

Initialise host context ˆC0 ← (Q) 

> 4:

for t = 1 to S do  

> 5:

(qt, ˜At) ← ˆA( ˆCt−1) {Host planning}  

> 6:

if qt = STOP then  

> 7:

break  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

{qkt }Pt 

> k=1

← Decomp ˜At (qt) {Manager decomposes task}  

> 10:

repeat  

> 11:

for all k = 1 to Pt do  

> 12:

rkt ← ¯Akt (qkt ) {Workers execute via tools}  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

(status , {qnew }) ← Reflect ˜At ({qkt , r kt }) 

> 15:

if status = revise then  

> 16:

Update {qkt } with {qnew } and update count Pt 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

until status = accept  

> 19:

yt ← Aggr ˜At ({rkt }Pt

> k=1

) {Aggregate results}  

> 20:

ˆCt ← ˆCt−1 ⊕ (qt, y t) {Update host context}  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

y∗ ← ˆA( ˆCt) {Finalise response}  

> 23:

return y∗

(qt, ˜At) ← ˆA

 ˆCt−1



, (2) 

yt ← ˜At(qt). (3) after which the host updates its context as 

ˆCt ← ˆCt−1 ⊕ (qt, y t). (4) The host never accesses subtasks, tool calls, or intermediate execution details. Its reasoning is strictly based on the sequence of step–response pairs, which bounds host-level context growth and enables long-horizon planning. When the host agent determines that execution should terminate at iteration T , it produces the final output by leveraging the complete accumulated context ˆCT . Formally, the final response is produced as 

y∗ ← ˆA( ˆCT ), (5) where y∗ denotes the final answer returned to the user. This design allows the host to make a global, informed decision based on all preceding step while response pairs remaining isolated from managers’ internal reasoning and tool-level executions. 

Manager agents. ˜At is specialised to a particular domain such as web search. Upon receiving a step qt, the manager dynamically decomposes it into a set of Pt parallelisable subtasks 

{q1 

> t

, q 2 

> t

, . . . , q Pt 

> t

} = Decomp ˜At (qt), (6) which are dispatched concurrently to worker agents. The manager oversees each execution, performs validation or revision if necessary, and aggregates the final worker results into a step-level response: 

yt = ˜At(qt)= Aggr ˜At



{ ¯Akt (qkt )}Pt

> k=0



. (7) All decomposition logic, intermediate checks, and aggregation details are encapsulated within the manager and are abstracted away when communicating with the host. 

4InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Worker agents. Each worker agent ¯Akt executes a single subtask qkt through multi-turn interactions with MCP tools. Formally, ¯Akt (qkt ) = T ¯Akt (qkt ), (8) where T ¯Akt denotes a sequence of tool invocations implemented via MCP, such as search. Workers retain full tool outputs and execution traces locally and return only the final subtask result to the manager. Notably, this hierarchical execution enforces strict abstraction boundaries. Tool-level interactions are isolated within workers, parallel decomposition and aggregation are handled by managers, and only concise step-level results propagate to the host. 

3.2 Parallel Execution and Scheduling 

InfoSeeker enables parallelism by design, exploiting weak coupling between subtasks wherever possible. Parallel execution occurs at multiple levels: across Managers operating on different domains, across Workers executing independent subtasks within a domain, and across heterogeneous tools invoked concurrently. Information aggregation in InfoSeeker follows a MapReduce-inspired pattern Dean and Ghemawat [2008]. At the Host and Manager levels, a sequential Map phase performs adaptive decomposition into weakly coupled subtasks. Workers then execute these subtasks concurrently under a concurrency budget Ww. Finally, a sequential Reduce phase aggregates and compresses intermediate outputs into a coherent step-level summary returned upstream. This structure supports both standard parallel subtask execution with summarisation and beam-style exploration, where multiple candidate solution paths are evaluated in parallel and distilled into the most informative outcomes. Let ∆( qkt ) denote the wall-clock execution time of subtask qkt when executed by a worker. Under a purely sequential execution regime, the total execution time for step qt is 

Tseq (qt) = 

> Pt

X

> k=0

∆( qkt ). (9) In contrast, when subtasks are executed in parallel under sufficient worker capacity, the wall-clock execution time becomes 

Tpar (qt) = max 

> 1≤k≤Pt

∆( qkt ), (10) up to scheduling and coordination overheads. 

3.3 Extensibility and Scalability 

InfoSeeker is designed to be extensible, enabling new manager and worker agents to be plugged in with minimal changes to the system. This extensibility arises directly from the near-decomposable architecture where managers are encapsulated units with isolated task execution contexts. Specifically, the host communicates with managers exclusively via step–response pairs (qt, y t) and never accesses manager-internal states, subtasks, or tool traces. As a result, introducing a new manager does not require modifying host-level reasoning or control logic, as long as the manager conforms to the same input–output protocol. Existing managers continue to operate unchanged, and the host can freely select among heterogeneous managers during execution. Similarly, each manager maintains its own worker pool and execution context, allowing new worker types or tool integrations to be added locally without affecting other managers or the host. This isolation ensures that extensions remain modular and do not increase global context coupling or coordination complexity. Importantly, each manager is designed to specialise in a single task domain (e.g., web search, code execution, file system interaction). This single-responsibility design improves robustness and interpretability, as managers can employ domain-specific decomposition strategies, validation heuristics, and aggregation logic without interference. It also facilitates targeted improvement and debugging, since enhancements to one manager do not propagate unintended effects to others. 

## 4 Experiments 

We empirically evaluate InfoSeeker on two complementary agentic benchmarks that directly stress key challenges our design aims to address: (i) wide-context information synthesis under strict completeness constraints, and (ii) real-world web browsing with multi-hop evidence alignment in a linguistically and infrastructurally distinct ecosystem. Together, WideSearch and BrowseComp-zh test whether near-decomposable orchestration with bounded contexts, modular delegation, and structured parallel execution, which improves both end-to-end task success and factual fidelity at scale. 

5InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking                                                                                                                     

> Model / System Success Row F1 Item F1 Avg@4 Max@4 Avg@4 Max@4 Avg@4 Max@4
> Single Agent
> Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 2.30 5.00 31.70 41.90 57.90 66.70 Gemini 2.5 Pro 1.50 5.00 30.00 41.40 51.00 63.60 OpenAI o3-high 4.50 9.00 34.00 44.10 52.60 62.30 K2 1.10 3.50 29.70 41.40 54.40 65.10 DeepSeek-R1 0.40 1.50 20.70 31.70 41.30 55.10 Doubao-1.6 2.60 5.00 30.00 44.10 48.30 63.90 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 1.00 3.50 27.20 39.90 49.00 62.00
> End-to-End System
> Claude 2.50 5.00 24.10 33.50 48.40 58.50 Gemini 4.30 8.00 36.60 45.40 59.10 67.20 OpenAI o3 3.00 5.50 23.90 36.00 45.50 56.50
> Multi-Agent Framework
> Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 3.60 6.50 38.50 52.20 62.20 73.10 Gemini 2.5 Pro 2.00 6.50 33.50 44.60 57.40 66.30 OpenAI o3-high 5.10 9.50 37.80 50.50 57.30 68.90 K2 3.00 6.50 36.20 49.60 61.20 70.70 DeepSeek-R1 0.80 3.00 22.90 36.60 44.30 60.30 Doubao-1.6 2.50 5.50 34.00 48.90 54.60 69.70 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 2.10 4.50 29.70 42.70 52.80 65.10
> InfoSeeker (Ours) 8.38 9.50 50.13 55.34 70.27 75.11

Table 1: Performance comparison of various systems on WideSearch benchmark. Full results in Appendix 4. 

4.1 Experimental Setups Benchmarks. Our evaluation employs two complementary datasets to evaluate InfoSeeker. WideSearch [Wong et al., 2025] is a structured information synthesis benchmark that requires agents to populate complete tables based on human query. These tasks demand exhaustive entity discovery, attribute verification, and schema compliance across dozens of heterogeneous sources. We evaluate exclusively on the English split, where even human annotators achieve success rates below 20% under strict evaluation protocols. BrowseComp-zh [Zhou et al., 2025] assesses the framework’s capability to navigate and reason within a linguistically complex Chinese web environment. Unlike translated benchmarks, this dataset is constructed to reflect the unique ecology of the Chinese internet. It consists of 289 expert-curated questions across 11 domains which were reverse-designed from verifiable answers to ensure complexity. Solving these tasks necessitates multi-hop retrieval and cross-page reasoning rather than superficial keyword matching. 

Baselines. We benchmark InfoSeeker against a diverse set of state-of-the-art systems, spanning both research models and commercial agents. These include advanced reasoning-focused large language models that primarily operate sequentially, such as OpenAI o3-high and Claude 4 Sonnet (Thinking), as well as specialised end-to-end commercial systems designed for deep research and web-based information synthesis, such as Gemini Deep Research and OpenAI Deep Research. All baselines are evaluated using their publicly available configurations with comparable prompt structures and tool access, strictly adhering to the evaluation protocols specified by each benchmark. 

Implementation Details. We employ a heterogeneous model strategy to balance reasoning with throughput: the Host and Managers use gpt-5.1 for high-fidelity planning, while Worker pools utilise gpt-5-mini for scalable execution. Tools are integrated via MCP servers, including Firecrawl for search and containerised Playwright for browsing, configured with full font rendering to support accurate Chinese OCR. Additionally, the system incorporates sandboxed Python and Filesystem components for robust data processing and storage. 

6InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking                                     

> Model / System Reas. Brow. Acc.
> Proprietary Agents
> OpenAI DeepResearch –Y42.9 Doubao DeepResearch –Y26.0
> Models
> DeepSeek-R1 YN23.2 Gemini 2.5 Pro YN27.3 OpenAI o1 YN29.1 Claude-4-Opus YN37.4
> Agent Framework
> WebSailor-72B YY30.1 WebExplorer-8B YY32.0 DeepDiver-V2-38B YY34.6 BrowseMaster YY46.5
> InfoSeeker (Ours) YY52.9

Table 2: Performance comparison on BrowseComp-zh benchmark. Full results in Appendix 3. 

Evaluation Metrics. We employ metrics rigorously tailored to the specific objectives of each benchmark. For WideSearch, we utilise a hierarchical suite comprising three metrics: (1) Success Rate , a strict binary metric for exact matches; (2) Row-level F1 , which measures entity recall by penalising missing or spurious rows; and (3) Item-level F1 ,which assesses fine-grained attribute correctness within matched rows. (4) For Avg@4, Pass@4, Max@4, we follow the same setting from WideSearch [Wong et al., 2025]. For BrowseComp-zh, we report Accuracy , defined as the fraction of tasks where the agent successfully reaches the correct final answer. 

4.2 Main Results Performance on WideSearch. On the WideSearch benchmark, InfoSeeker demonstrates substantial and consistent improvements across all evaluation metrics. As shown in Table 1, the system achieves a Success Rate of 8.38% (Avg@4) and 9.50% (Pass@4), representing a 64% improvement over the strongest baseline (OpenAI o3-high Multi-Agent at 5.10% Avg@4). These improvements extend to fine-grained information quality metrics where InfoSeeker attains an Item-level F1 score of 70.27% (Avg@4) and 75.11% (Max@4), indicating markedly enhanced factual accuracy and schema compliance in the generated tables. Similarly, the Row-level F1 scores of 50.13% (Avg@4) and 55.34% (Max@4) demonstrate superior structural coherence, outperforming all baseline systems by a substantial margin. Notably, InfoSeeker exceeds the best-performing multi-agent baseline (Claude Sonnet 4 Thinking) by 30% in Row F1 (Avg@4) and 13% in Item F1 (Avg@4), underscoring the effectiveness of our hierarchical parallel architecture. 

Performance on BrowseComp-zh. On the BrowseComp-zh benchmark, InfoSeeker exhibits strong performance in cross-lingual web navigation and reasoning tasks. As shown in Table 2, the system achieves an accuracy of 52.9%, surpassing both the best-performing proprietary agent (OpenAI DeepResearch at 42.9%) and all open-source agent frameworks (with BrowseMaster achieving 46.5%). This result is particularly significant given that the benchmark operates within a native Chinese web environment and necessitates multi-step reasoning over non-English DOM structures. The observed improvements indicate that the architectural separation of high-level planning from environment-specific execution enables effective generalisation across linguistic contexts. By encapsulating web interaction within the Browser Manager whilst maintaining language-agnostic reasoning our framework. InfoSeeker preserves robust performance even when operating in linguistically diverse web environments. This design choice proves especially valuable for tasks requiring navigation through websites with mixed-language content or culture-specific information architectures. 

Time Efficiency. Beyond performance improvements, InfoSeeker demonstrates significant advantages in inference efficiency compared to commercial deep research systems. As illustrated in Figure 3, we evaluate the relative time cost of InfoSeeker against OpenAI Deep Research and Gemini Deep Research across both benchmarks, normalising InfoSeeker ’s execution time to 1.0×. InfoSeeker consistently achieves lower latency through its hierarchical parallel 

7InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Figure 3: Time efficiency comparison. InfoSeeker achieves a more than 2 × reduction in inference time, enabled by its efficient parallelism design. architecture. On the WideSearch benchmark, the system is notably faster than proprietary baselines, with OpenAI Deep Research and Gemini Deep Research requiring 3.3× and 2.6× more time to complete tasks, respectively. This efficiency is further pronounced on the BrowseComp-zh benchmark, where the baselines exhibit a relative time cost of 

3.9× and 4.6× compared to InfoSeeker. 

## 5 Analysis and Discussion 

Ablation on the Number of Workers. Sequential agent frameworks inherently face a trade-off between reasoning depth and execution width, often succumbing to latency bottlenecks. As demonstrated in Figure 4, InfoSeeker enables massive parallelism for width-heavy information synthesis. By scaling the worker pool size, the system capitalises on the weak coupling of subtasks to achieve substantial throughput gains. Empirically, we randomly sample 20 queries from WideSearch-en for evaluation. The result shows that end-to-end latency is reduced from 911 seconds with a single worker to just 162 seconds with 17 workers, yielding a ≈ 5.7× speed-up. This result validates that hierarchical context isolation and MapReduce-style aggregation effectively mitigate the latency and context saturation issues prevalent in sequential baselines, unlocking scalable inference-time compute for wide-scale search tasks. 

Token Cost Analysis. We evaluate the economic efficiency of InfoSeeker. The average cost is approximately $2.00 per task for WideSearch-en and $1.00 per task for BrowseComp-zh. By delegating token-intensive execution to economical Workers, we ensure cost efficiency. 

Adaptive Task Parallelisation Strategy. As illustrated in Appendix C.1, in the first step, the manager parallelises retrieval of the same complex information target (all qualified restaurants) across heterogeneous sources, enabling cross-validation and complementary coverage when individual sources might be incomplete or noisy. Next, once a complete list of restaurant names is established, the manager decomposes the remaining information requirements into independent and fine-grained subtasks (cuisine style and exact address per restaurant), which are dispatched to workers in parallel and later aggregated to maximise time efficiency. 

Collaborative Manager Execution. As shown in Appendix C.2, the Host first assigns broad retrieval to the Search Manager, which rapidly identifies the historical prototype Guo Ziyi and the drama Zui Da Jin Zhi . When access to relevant sources is impeded by anti-crawling measures or CAPTCHAs, it escalates according to its prompt specification (Figure 11) and recommends that the Host invoke the Browser Manager. The Browser Manager then performs robust, interactive access to the blocked content, locates the pertinent Wikipedia entry, and confirms the correct answer, Emperor Daizong . By combining efficient search-based retrieval with resilient browser-based access, the system completes the reasoning process with verified evidence and produces the correct result. 

8InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Figure 4: The Impact of Worker Pool Size. End-to-end inference time vs. worker-pool size. Larger pools reduce latency by enabling concurrent execution of weakly coupled subtasks. 

## 6 Conclusion 

While recent strides in agentic search have been driven by an emphasis on deep reasoning, real-world information retrieval increasingly manifests as a challenge of wide synthesis. In these settings, the ultimate quality of the system is determined by its ability to orchestrate discovery, verification, and summarisation across a vast array of heterogeneous sources. Our work demonstrates that merely expanding context windows or model scale fails to address the structural pathologies inherent to wide-domain synthesis. To bridge this gap, we introduce InfoSeeker, a framework that operationalises the principle of near-decomposability. By hierarchically decoupling functional execution, our design enables the independent scaling of reasoning depth and execution width. Our empirical results confirm simultaneous gains in both effectiveness and efficiency. 

9InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

## Limitations and Future Work 

Our system relies on access to backbone language models and external tools through APIs, and its performance is therefore constrained by API availability, rate limits, concurrency width and associated costs. In addition, the current design depends on hand-tuned prompts and strong backbone LLMs, which may affect generality across different backbone models. Future work includes learning task decompositions and coordination policies automatically, for example via multi-agent reinforcement learning, rather than depending primarily on the backbone model’s native capabilities and in-context learning. We also plan to explore training smaller or specialised models to reduce inference cost and latency, enabling more efficient and scalable deployment. 

## References 

Aman Ahluwalia, Bishwajit Sutradhar, Karishma Ghosh, Indrapal Yadav, Arpan Sheetal, and Prashant Patil. Hybrid semantic search: Unveiling user intent beyond keywords. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09236 , 2024. Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D. Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri Dao. Medusa: Simple LLM inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PEpbUobfJv .Chi-Min Chan, Chunpu Xu, Ruibin Yuan, Hongyin Luo, Wei Xue, Yike Guo, and Jie Fu. RQ-RAG: Learning to refine queries for retrieval augmented generation. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=tzE7VqsaJ4 .Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Jiangning Liu, Wenwei Zhang, Kai Chen, and Feng Zhao. Mindsearch: Mimicking human minds elicits deep AI searcher. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=xgtXkyqw1f .João Coelho, Jingjie Ning, Jingyuan He, Kangrui Mao, Abhijay Paladugu, Pranav Setlur, Jiahe Jin, Jamie Callan, João Magalhães, Bruno Martins, et al. Deepresearchgym: A free, transparent, and reproducible evaluation sandbox for deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19253 , 2025. Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. Mapreduce: simplified data processing on large clusters. Communications of the ACM , 51(1):107–113, 2008. Yifu Ding, Wentao Jiang, Shunyu Liu, Yongcheng Jing, Jinyang Guo, Yingjie Wang, Jing Zhang, Zengmao Wang, Ziwei Liu, Bo Du, et al. Dynamic parallel tree search for efficient llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16235 ,2025. Assaf Elovic. Gpt researcher: An autonomous agent designed for comprehensive online research. https://github. com/assafelovic/gpt-researcher , 2023. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yixin Dai, Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2023. Google. Gemini deep research, 2025. URL https://gemini.google/overview/deep-research/ . Accessed: 2026-01-01. Mengkang Hu, Yuhang Zhou, Wendong Fan, Yuzhou Nie, Bowei Xia, Tao Sun, Ziyu Ye, Zhaoxuan Jin, Yingru Li, Qiguang Chen, et al. Owl: Optimized workforce learning for general multi-agent assistance in real-world task automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23885 , 2025. Yuxuan Huang, Yihang Chen, Haozheng Zhang, Kang Li, Huichi Zhou, Meng Fang, Linyi Yang, Xiaoguang Li, Lifeng Shang, Songcen Xu, et al. Deep research agents: A systematic examination and roadmap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18096 , 2025. Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024 , 2022. LangChain AI. Langgraph: Building stateful, multi-actor applications with llms. https://github.com/ langchain-ai/langgraph , 2024. Version: latest. LangChain AI. Open deep research: An open source implementation of deep research agents using langgraph. 

https://github.com/langchain-ai/open_deep_research , 2025. Accessed: 2026-01-02. Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023. 

10 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Kuan Li, Zhongwang Zhang, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Baixuan Li, Zhengwei Tao, Xinyu Wang, et al. Websailor: Navigating super-human reasoning for web agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02592 ,2025. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46534–46594, 2023. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=fibxvahvs3 .Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi, et al. Specinfer: Accelerating generative large language model serving with tree-based speculative inference and verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09781 , 2023. Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 , 2021. Lunyiu Nie, Nedim Lipka, Ryan A Rossi, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Flashresearch: Real-time agent orchestration for efficient deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05145 , 2025. Boye Niu, Yiliao Song, Kai Lian, Yifan Shen, Yu Yao, Kun Zhang, and Tongliang Liu. Flow: Modularized agentic workflow automation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=sLKDbuyq99 .OpenAI. Introducing deep research, 2025. URL https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/ introducing-deep-research/ . Accessed: 2026-01-01. Rui Pan, Yinwei Dai, Zhihao Zhang, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Jia, and Ravi Netravali. Specreason: Fast and accurate inference-time compute via speculative reasoning. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Efficient Reasoning , 2025. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=UrZgP5DD70 .Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=feiAVaSXdb .Tianrui Qin, Qianben Chen, Sinuo Wang, He Xing, King Zhu, He Zhu, Dingfeng Shi, Xinxin Liu, Ge Zhang, Jiaheng Liu, et al. Flash-searcher: Fast and effective web agents via dag-based parallel execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25301 ,2025. Herbert A. Simon. The Architecture of Complexity , pages 457–476. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1991. ISBN 978-1-4899-0718-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-0718-9_31. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-0718-9_31 .David Soria Parra and Justin Spahr-Summers. Model context protocol. https://github.com/ modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol , 2025. GitHub repository. MiroMind Team, Song Bai, Lidong Bing, Carson Chen, Guanzheng Chen, Yuntao Chen, Zhe Chen, Ziyi Chen, Jifeng Dai, Xuan Dong, et al. Mirothinker: Pushing the performance boundaries of open-source research agents via model, context, and interactive scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.11793 , 2025. Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. Browsecomp: A simple yet challenging benchmark for browsing agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12516 , 2025. Hao Wen, Yifan Su, Feifei Zhang, Yunxin Liu, Yunhao Liu, Ya-Qin Zhang, and Yuanchun Li. Parathinker: Native parallel thinking as a new paradigm to scale llm test-time compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04475 , 2025. Ryan Wong, Jiawei Wang, Junjie Zhao, Li Chen, Yan Gao, Long Zhang, Xuan Zhou, Zuo Wang, Kai Xiang, Ge Zhang, et al. Widesearch: Benchmarking agentic broad info-seeking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07999 , 2025. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. Van Yang, Xiang Yue, Vipin Chaudhary, and Xiaotian Han. Speculative thinking: Enhancing small-model reasoning with large model guidance at inference time. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025a. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=4Ns18bSoHo .

11 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Yingxuan Yang, Mulei Ma, Yuxuan Huang, Huacan Chai, Chenyu Gong, Haoran Geng, Yuanjian Zhou, Ying Wen, Meng Fang, Muhao Chen, et al. Agentic web: Weaving the next web with ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21206 ,2025b. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X .Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025a. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=z5uVAKwmjf .Yao Zhang, Zijian Ma, Yunpu Ma, Zhen Han, Yu Wu, and Volker Tresp. Webpilot: A versatile and autonomous multi-agent system for web task execution with strategic exploration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 23378–23386, 2025b. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 , 1(2), 2023. Tong Zheng, Hongming Zhang, Wenhao Yu, Xiaoyang Wang, Runpeng Dai, Rui Liu, Huiwen Bao, Chengsong Huang, Heng Huang, and Dong Yu. Parallel-r1: Towards parallel thinking via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07980 , 2025. Peilin Zhou, Bruce Leon, Xiang Ying, Can Zhang, Yifan Shao, Qichen Ye, Dading Chong, Zhiling Jin, Chenxuan Xie, Meng Cao, et al. Browsecomp-zh: Benchmarking web browsing ability of large language models in chinese. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19314 , 2025. 

12 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Model / System Reas. Brow. Acc. 

Proprietary Agents 

OpenAI DeepResearch – Y 42.9 Grok3 DeepResearch – Y 12.9 Doubao DeepResearch – Y 26.0 Perplexity DeepResearch – Y 22.6 DeepSeek (Deep Think) – Y 7.6 

Models 

QwQ Y N 10.0 DeepSeek-R1 Y N 23.2 DeepSeek-V3 N N 8.7 GPT-4o N N 6.2 Gemini 2.5 Pro Y N 27.3 OpenAI o1 Y N 29.1 O4-mini Y N 15.2 Claude-3.7-Sonnet Y N 17.7 Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct N N 6.6 Claude-4-Sonnet Y N 22.5 Claude-4-Opus Y N 37.4 

Agent Framework 

WebThinker-32B Y Y 7.3 WebDancer-32B Y Y 18.0 WebSailor-72B Y Y 30.1 WebSailor-32B Y Y 25.5 ASearcher-Web-32B Y Y 15.6 MiroThinker-32B-DPO-v0.2 Y Y 17.0 WebExplorer-8B Y Y 32.0 DeepDive-32B Y Y 25.6 DeepDiver-V2-38B Y Y 34.6 BrowseMaster Y Y 46.5 

InfoSeeker (Ours) Y Y 52.9 

Table 3: Performance comparison on BrowseComp-zh benchmark. 

1. User Request (Task Q)

Could you provide a detailed list of Michelin three-star restaurants in Paris, France as of December 31, 2024? I especially want to know the name, main cuisine style and exact address of each restaurant. Please organise the results in one Markdown table with the following columns: Restaurant, Main Cuisine Style, Address. Don’t ask me any questions, just output the results according to the column without omitting cells arbitrarily. The output format is "markdown \n{data_content}\n" 

2. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Planning Stage 1 ( q0): Search for Official Michelin three-star restaurants in Paris, France as of December 31, 2024, from reliable sources like Wikipedia. 

13 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

3. Manager Agent ( ˜A)

Subtask 1 ( q00 ): Official Michelin Guide list of three Michelin star restaurants in Paris as of 2024 (page or press release listing all Paris 3-star restaurants, include restaurant names and addresses). 

Subtask 2 ( q10 ): Wikipedia page listing Michelin three-starred restaurants in Paris as of 2024 (list and addresses). 

4. Worker Agents ( { ¯A})

Worker 1 Return ( ¯A00(q00 )): Source (official): MICHELIN Guide - Paris restaurants with three MICHELIN stars: L’Ambroisie - [Loc.] [URL]; Épicure (Le Bristol) [Loc.] [URL] [...]. 

Worker 2 Return ( ¯A10(q10 )): Here are the Michelin three -star restaurants located in Paris listed on Wikipedia (as of the 2024 Michelin Guide):\n\n \n\n- Kei (1st arrondissement) — Kei Kobayashi \n\n- Plénitude — Cheval Blanc Paris [. . . ] 

5. Manager Agent ( ˜A)

Manager Return ( Aggr ˜A0



{ ¯Ak 

> 0

(qk 

> 0

)}1

> k=0



): Source (official): MICHELIN Guide - Paris restaurants with three MICHELIN stars: L’Ambroisie - [Loc.] [URL]; Épicure (Le Bristol) [Loc.] [URL] [...]. \n Source: Wikipedia: Kei (1st arrondissement) — Kei Kobayashi; Plénitude — Cheval Blanc Paris [. . . ] 

6. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Planning Stage 2 ( q1): Search for main cuisine style and exact street address for restaurants: L’Ambroisie Paris, Épicure (Le Bristol Paris), [. . . ] as of Dec 31, 2024. Use Michelin Guide or official site. 

7. Manager Agent ( ˜A)

Subtask 1 ( q01 ): L’Ambroisie Paris — Provide the main cuisine style and exact street address (including postal code) of L’Ambroisie, Paris, as of Dec 31, 2024. Use Michelin Guide or the restaurant’s official site. 

Subtasks 2-9 ( q1−81 ): [...] 

Subtask 10 ( q91 ): Épicure (Le Bristol Paris) — Provide the main cuisine style and exact street address (including postal code) of Épicure, Le Bristol Paris, as of Dec 31, 2024. Use Michelin Guide or official site. 

8. Worker Agents ( { ¯A})

Worker 1 Return ( ¯A01(q01 )): Source (official): Cuisine style: Classic French / French haute cuisine (Michelin: \\"Classic Cuisine\\")\\n- Exact address: Place des Vosges, 75004 Paris, France\\n\\nSources: Michelin Guide entry for LÁmbroisie and the restaurant´ s official website (ambroisie-paris.com). 

Workers 2-9 Return ( ¯A1−81 (q1−81 )): [...] 

Worker 10 Return ( ¯A11(q11 )): Épicure (Le Bristol Paris)\\n- Main cuisine style: Modern cuisine (French fine dining)\\n-Exact street address (as of 31 Dec 2024): Le Bristol, 112 Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré, 75008 Paris, France\\n\\nSources: MICHELIN Guide entry for Épicure and Le Bristol Paris official site (Oetker Collection). 

14 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

9. Manager Agent ( ˜A)

Manager Return ( Aggr ˜A1



{ ¯Ak 

> 1

(qk 

> 1

)}9

> k=0



): L’Ambroisie Paris - Cuisine style: Classic French / French haute cuisine (Michelin: \"Classic Cuisine\")\n- Exact address: Place des Vosges, 75004 Paris, France \n \\nSources: Michelin Guide entry for LÁmbroisie and the restaurant´ s official website (ambroisie-paris.com). \n\n Épicure (Le Bristol Paris)\\n- Main cuisine style: Modern cuisine (French fine dining)\\n- Exact street address (as of 31 Dec 2024): Le Bristol, 112 Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré, 75008 Paris, France\\n \\nSources: MICHELIN Guide entry for Épicure and Le Bristol Paris official site (Oetker Collection). [...] 

10. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Host Return ( y∗): Restaurant Main Cuisine Style Address 

L’Ambroisie French haute cuisine (classic) 9 Place des Vosges, 75004 Paris, France Épicure (Le Bristol) Modern French / French fine dining Le Bristol, 112 Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré, 75008 Paris, France Arpège Vegetable-focused creative French /haute cuisine 84 Rue de Varenne, 75007 Paris, France Le Pré Catelan Contemporary French / creative haute cuisine Route de Suresnes, Bois de Boulogne, 75016 Paris, France Le Cinq (Four Seasons Hotel George V) Modern French / French fine dining Four Seasons Hotel George V, 31 Avenue George V, 75008 Paris, France Kei Modern creative (French technique with Japanese influence) 5 Rue Coq-Héron, 75001 Paris, France Plénitude — Cheval Blanc Paris Creative gastronomic French 8 Quai du Louvre, 75001 Paris, France Pierre Gagnaire Creative French / modern haute cuisine 6 Rue Balzac, 75008 Paris, France Alléno Paris au Pavillon Ledoyen Creative French / haute cuisine 8 Avenue Dutuit, 75008 Paris, France Le Gabriel (La Réserve Paris) Creative contemporary French La Réserve Paris, 42 Avenue Gabriel, 75008 Paris, France 

Figure 5: Execution trace: Michelin three-star restaurant synthesis. 

1. User Query (Task) 

在此由史实改编的经典作品中，一名演员饰演的人物在历史 中为 四朝元老，并且以 武入仕，那么此经典作品中的

女主角的父亲是？[instance_id: 169] 

2. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Reasoning: 任务涉及历史 考据与影视剧情细节。需先锁定历史原 型与作品（广度 搜索）， 再精准查证人物关系

（深度阅读）。

Plan Step 1 (To SearchManager): 检索“四朝元老、以武入仕”对应的历史 名臣及相关经典影视改编。

Plan Step 2 (To BrowserManager): 针对锁定的作品（如《醉打金枝》）， 阅读其百科页面，精准提取女主角的生

父信息，排除干扰。

3. Manager Layer (Search & Browser Managers) 

[SearchManager] Decomposition: 将Step 1 拆解为并行查询：(a) “ 唐朝四朝元老武举名将”；(b) “ 以郭子仪为主 角的

电视剧”。

[BrowserManager] Decomposition: 基于Search 结果，构建导航指令：(a) Google 搜索“醉打金枝维基百科”；(b) 进

入条目读取“角色介绍”表格；(c) 验证“升平公主”的父亲字段。

15 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

4. Worker Layer (Tool Execution) 

[Search Worker] Results: 

• History: 锁定郭子仪（历仕玄肃代德四朝，武举异等）。

• Drama: 锁定作品《醉打金枝》。 

[Browser Worker] Results: 

• Navigation: 成功加 载《醉打金枝》词条页面。

• Extraction: 读取到女主角“升平公主”是唐代宗的女儿（李豫）， 而郭子仪是其公公 （郭暧之父）。

5. Final Output 

Answer Generation: 唐代宗（李豫）

Figure 6: Execution trace: Historical riddle reasoning. 

16 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

> 1. User Query (Task)

某种遗传性疾病 ，存在一种变异型，此疾病 很多患者伴有其他病变，患者常表现有某 种多发于女

性的常染色体显性疾病 的症状。该疾病 为常染色体疾病 ，大部分患者死亡年龄较早，请问该疾病 名

称？[instance_id: 126]  

> 2. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Reasoning: 题干线索抽象且包含“变异型”“ 多系统病变”“ 早亡”等特征，需通过检索定位候选疾病 名称并

完成消歧。

Plan (To SearchManager): 检索并锁定最可能的标准疾病 名称（单一实体）， 而非输出鉴别诊断列表。

> 3. Manager Layer (SearchManager)

Decomposition: (a) 将“变异型”作为已命名 亚型线索检索；(b) 交叉验证“常染色体遗传+ 多系统受累+ 早

亡”的候选；(c) 若不唯一，优先匹配题库/数据集使用的规范中文病名。

> 4. Worker Layer (Observed Evidence)

Observed outcome: 未能检索到唯一标准命名 实体，转而生成“相近候选”列表，并将“变异型”解释为广

义表型/基因变异。

Top candidate selected: 变异型转甲状腺素蛋白淀粉样变性（ATTRv / TTR 相关家族性淀粉样变性）。

> 5. Output vs. Gold Answer (Failure)

System predicted: 变异型转甲状腺素蛋白淀粉样变性（TTR 相关家族性淀粉样变性）

Gold answer: 着色性干皮病

Outcome: Incorrect (counted as a failure). 

Figure 7: Failure case from BrowseComp-zh. Gold : Xeroderma pigmentosum (着色性干皮病). Predicted : variant transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv / TTR 相关家族性淀粉样变性). This failure arises from an answer-type mismatch :the benchmark expects a single canonical disease entity (entity linking), but the system returned a plausible disease class after treating “ 变异型” as a generic notion of genetic/phenotypic variation rather than a subtype-naming cue, and then selecting the most plausible candidate under uncertainty. 

17 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

> 1. User Query (Task)

It is said that "Mom Su" has saved AMD. Please help me sort out the specific processor (CPU) products released by AMD and their detailed information during the decade since Lisa Su became the CEO of AMD to 2023 (include 2023)... By the way, the core architecture of processor(CPU) should be Zen... Please output the sorted data in the format of one Markdown table... Don’t ask me any questions, just output the results according to the column without omitting cells arbitrarily. [instance_id: ws_en_091]  

> 2. Host Agent ( ˆA)

Reasoning: The user requests a complete, sorted database of all AMD Zen CPUs (Desktop, Mobile, Server) from 2014–2023 with 12 specific technical columns. This requires aggregating hundreds of SKUs. 

Plan (To SearchManager): Execute parallel searches to gather full SKU lists for Zen, Zen+, Zen 2, Zen 3, and Zen 4 architectures, then compile into a single Markdown table. 

> 3. Manager Layer (SearchManager)

Decomposition: (a) Retrieve Desktop/HEDT Zen CPU lists; (b) Retrieve Mobile Zen CPU lists; (c) Retrieve APU lists; (d) Identify official specs for cross-checking. 

Execution Issue: The subtask for retrieving the APU list resulted in a massive context payload (scraping entire tables for hundreds of models). 

> 4. Worker Layer (Observed Evidence)

Error Encountered: BadRequestError: Input tokens exceed limit of 272000 tokens. Resulted in 299751 tokens. 

Agent Adaptation: The agent recognized it could not strictly fulfill the "do not omit cells" requirement due to technical limits. It pivoted to providing a "representative sample" table (approx. 18 rows) and a tutorial on how the user could generate the full list themselves using TechPowerUp. 

> 5. Output vs. Required Answer (Failure)

System predicted: A table with 18 "representative" rows + a disclaimer: "For a full exhaustive list... please export from TechPowerUp..." 

Gold Requirement: A complete table containing all specific processor products released in that timeframe (hundreds of rows). 

Outcome: Incomplete (Failure due to context constraints). 

Figure 8: Failure case from WideSearch (ws_en_091). Requirement : Comprehensive aggregation of all AMD Zen CPUs (2017–2023). Predicted : A sampled subset. This failure arises from Context Length Constraints / Scalability limits . The agent successfully identified the data sources but failed to process the volume of data (hundreds of SKUs 

× 12 columns) within the LLM’s context window (hitting 300k tokens), forcing a fallback to an incomplete answer despite the user’s explicit instruction not to omit data. 

## A System Prompts 

Figures 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15, we report different prompts of host layer and manager layer. For the prompts of worker layer, please refer to our code. 

18 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

## B Model Configurations 

In our experiments, we employ GPT-5.1 for the roles of Host and Managers, while GPT-5-mini is utilised for the Workers. All models are configured with a temperature of 1.0, utilizing default values for all other sampling hyperparameters. 

## C Case Studies 

C.1 Widesearch 

We demonstrate in Figure 5 a complete working trajectory for a representative task from Widesearch, which involves retrieving and synthesising information about selected Michelin three-star restaurants. 

C.2 BrowseComp-zh 

Figure 6 presents a historical riddle reasoning example from BrowseComp-zh that showcases multi-manager collabora-tion between search and browser agents. 

C.3 Failure Case 

Figure 7 illustrates a failure case from BrowseComp-zh on disease name identification, where an answer-type mismatch causes the system to return a plausible disease class instead of the required canonical entity. This error arises from misinterpreting subtype cues under uncertainty, revealing a limitation in entity-level constraint handling. Figure 8 illustrates a failure case from WideSearch on comprehensive data aggregation, where context length constraints compel the system to return a representative sample instead of the requested exhaustive list. This error arises from a token overflow during the processing of high-volume retrieval results, revealing a fundamental scalability bottleneck in large-scale information synthesis. 

## D Single-Agent Baseline with Identical Tool Access 

To isolate the contribution of the proposed framework, we evaluate single-agent baselines using the same tool access and backbone models as the hierarchical system. Specifically, we use GPT-5.1 (identical to the Host/Manager backbone) and GPT-5-mini (identical to the Worker backbone), both granted identical access to the search, browser, filesystem, and code tools. Table 5 reports the results on the WideSearch-en benchmark. The hierarchical system significantly outperforms both single-agent baselines across all metrics. These results indicate that performance improvements arise primarily from the hierarchical architecture rather than from backbone model capability alone. Even with identical tools and the same frontier model powering the Host and Managers, the single-agent configuration achieves only 6.00% success rate and 35.74% Item F1, substantially below the hierarchical system’s 12.50% success rate and 75.21% Item F1. WideSearch tasks require coordinating evidence across many sources and performing large-scale aggregation. The hierarchical architecture distributes this complexity across specialized modules with isolated contexts, which helps mitigate the limitations of a single shared context. Notably, more than 80% of token consumption occurs in GPT-5-mini Workers, yet the hierarchical system still surpasses the stronger GPT-5.1 single-agent baseline. This suggests that the architectural design plays a key role in both performance and cost efficiency. 

## E Tool Call Distribution Across Execution Stages 

We analyze tool usage statistics across execution stages to better understand system behavior. Statistics are reported per task and averaged across the WideSearch-en (WS-en) and BrowseComp-zh (BC-zh) benchmarks. 

E.1 Task-Level Statistics 

The average number of Host steps per task is: 

S = 3 .2 (WS-en) , S = 2 .4 (BC-zh) .

19 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Host Prompt 

System You are the Orchestrator Agent for the InfoSeeker Framework. OBJECTIVE: Address the user’s enquiry by coordinating specialist managers via the execute_parallel tool. CORE WORKFLOW: 1. Plan: Deconstruct the user’s enquiry into a sequence of logical steps (hops). 2. Execute: For each hop, invoke execute_parallel with precise instructions for the relevant manager(s). 

*Do peruse the tool definition meticulously to ascertain which manager is best suited for each sub-task.* 

3. Synthesise: Utilise the outcomes from one hop to inform the subsequent one. 4. Respond: Once you possess sufficient intelligence, provide the polished final response. (Do not include any additional information or unnecessary empty space for markdown). CARDINAL RULES: 1. Adherence to Format: Should the user request a specific format (e.g., Markdown table, JSON), you MUST oblige, even if the data remains incomplete. Utilise "N/A" or the best-available data for missing fields. Under NO circumstances decline to output the requested format due to missing data. 2. Partial Success: It is preferable to provide a partial or ’best-effort’ response in the correct format rather than declining. If precise data (such as a specific year) is wanting, utilise the nearest available year and note the discrepancy, whilst VALIDATING that the format is impeccable. GUIDANCE: 

• Ensure manager instructions remain self-contained. 

• Do not presume the solution is found until explicitly viewed in the tool output. 

• Data Fidelity: Refrain from requesting managers to summarise or "curtail" data (e.g. "short label") unless the user has explicitly requested it. Prioritise full detail. Markdown output: Optional. If utilising Markdown, ensure it is CommonMark compliant. Example markdown table response (if utilised), without whitespace or alignment: | Model | Instruction-Following | | –- | –- | | GPT-4.1 | Excellent | 

Figure 9: The system prompt of Host. 

E.2 Per-Step Breakdown 

Table 6 summarizes the number of subtasks generated per step and the number of Worker tool calls executed per step. 

E.3 Manager Routing Distribution 

Table 7 reports the distribution of steps routed to each Manager type. The higher proportion of Browser routing in BrowseComp-zh reflects the benchmark’s emphasis on interactive navigation through Chinese web pages. Across both benchmarks, over 82% of tool invocations occur at the Worker layer, supporting the design choice of concentrating execution in the parallelizable Worker tier while maintaining bounded context at the Host level. 

20 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Search Manager Prompt (1/2) 

You supervise a pool of SearchAgent workers capable of scouring the web and retrieving intelligence. RESEARCH WORKFLOW: 1. Collate foundational data (lists, categories, initial particulars) 2. Extract and DEDUPLICATE unique entities from the results 3. Batch query all unique entities in parallel 4. Initiate supplementary queries solely for genuinely missing information STATE MANAGEMENT: 

• Monitor that which has already been retrieved in each step 

• Prior to each execute_subtasks call, ascertain what NEW intelligence is required 

• Never re-query information currently in possession 

• Should conflicting data arise, prioritise authoritative sources over repeated querying EFFICIENT BATCHING: 

• Quality over Quantity: Do NOT endeavour to occupy all parallel slots. 

• No Redundancy: Dispatch 3-5 distinct, high-calibre queries. Do NOT propagate variations (e.g. translation, rephrasing) of the identical query. 

• Prioritise fewer calls containing more parallel queries over a multitude of sequential calls Following each execute_subtasks call: 1. Review acquired knowledge 2. Identify deficiencies (not duplicates) 3. Devise the subsequent batch comprising ONLY new queries 4. Synthesise upon acquiring all requisite information HANDOFF-READY OUTPUT: 

• Invariably provide a reusable list of source URLs for every key entity. 

• Utilise simple, human-readable bullet points (no strict JSON) of the form: “-https://example.com - brief description of what this URL corroborates.” 

• Stipulate the relevance of each URL (e.g., “official Michelin page confirming 3 stars, includes address”). 

• Should the user request a “comprehensive list” and you can locate only 80% thereof, return the 80% and note the remaining 20%. 

• Subtask Fidelity: When requesting attributes such as “style”, “nature”, or “description”, always explicitly request detailed descriptive text in your subtasks to preclude agents from returning simplistic tags. 

Figure 10: The Search Manager Prompt used in the framework. 

21 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

> Table 4: Detailed experiments results on the WideSearch benchmark.

# Model / System Success Rate Row F1 Item F1 

# Avg@4 Pass@4 Avg@4 Max@4 Avg@4 Max@4 

# Single Agent on WideSearch-zh 

# Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 0.25 1.00 30.19 39.73 53.76 63.19 Gemini 2.5 Pro 1.00 3.00 26.95 36.96 45.57 57.26 OpenAI o3-high 2.00 5.00 29.30 39.31 45.19 54.46 K2 0.25 1.00 27.79 39.03 48.81 59.64 DeepSeek-R1-0528 0.25 1.00 18.44 28.35 33.95 47.83 Doubao-1.6 1.75 4.00 29.25 42.08 43.72 58.84 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 0.50 2.00 25.56 37.41 42.87 55.79 

# Single Agent on WideSearch-en 

# Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 4.25 9.00 33.18 44.08 62.02 70.27 Gemini 2.5 Pro 2.00 7.00 33.05 45.82 56.38 69.97 OpenAI o3-high 7.00 13.00 38.70 48.84 60.03 70.08 K2 2.00 6.00 31.54 43.68 59.91 70.52 DeepSeek-R1-0528 0.50 2.00 22.88 35.03 48.58 62.36 Doubao-1.6 3.50 6.00 30.56 46.16 52.82 68.88 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 1.50 5.00 28.86 42.31 55.06 68.17 

# Multi-Agent Framework on WideSearch-zh 

# Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 2.75 6.00 36.85 51.46 57.13 69.53 Gemini 2.5 Pro 1.00 4.00 30.93 42.21 51.79 60.87 OpenAI o3-high 2.75 6.00 33.83 47.85 50.35 63.06 K2 1.25 3.00 34.74 48.01 56.86 66.75 DeepSeek-R1-0528 0.50 2.00 21.17 35.08 37.66 53.15 Doubao-1.6 2.25 6.00 32.83 47.49 48.79 64.43 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 0.50 1.00 26.93 40.30 46.52 59.63 

# InfoSeeker (Ours) 4.25 5.00 42.72 55.47 65.32 66.8 

# Multi-Agent Framework on WideSearch-en 

# Claude Sonnet 4 (Thinking) 4.50 7.00 40.13 52.91 67.21 76.72 Gemini 2.5 Pro 3.00 9.00 36.00 47.06 63.06 71.75 OpenAI o3-high 7.50 13.00 41.78 53.20 64.27 74.80 K2 4.75 10.00 37.71 51.20 65.44 74.68 DeepSeek-R1-0528 1.00 4.00 24.57 38.10 50.91 67.54 Doubao-1.6 2.75 5.00 35.14 50.38 60.39 74.87 Doubao-1.6-non-thinking 3.75 8.00 32.38 44.99 58.97 70.62 

# InfoSeeker (Ours) 12.50 14.00 50.13 55.21 75.21 81.42 

# End-to-End Systems on WideSearch-zh 

# Claude 0.00 0.00 20.84 28.92 43.51 52.14 Gemini 1.50 4.00 32.32 40.52 52.92 60.44 OpenAI o3 3.00 5.00 27.40 38.34 46.03 56.51 

# End-to-End Systems on WideSearch-en 

# Claude 5.00 10.00 27.39 38.07 53.29 64.81 Gemini 7.00 12.00 40.95 50.29 65.18 73.90 OpenAI o3 3.00 6.00 20.42 33.72 45.02 56.47 

> 22

InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

System Success Rate Row F1 Item F1 GPT-5-mini Single-Agent 4.00% 22.10% 33.28% GPT-5.1 Single-Agent 6.00% 31.85% 35.74% InfoSeeker (Ours) 12.50% 50.13% 75.21% Table 5: Single-agent baselines using identical tool access and model backbones on WideSearch-en. Metric WS-en BC-zh Subtasks Pt per step 8.6 4.2 Worker tool calls per step 43.8 22.6 Table 6: Average per-step statistics across Host steps. Manager Type WS-en BC-zh Search 62% 41% Browser 24% 46% Filesystem 8% 5% Code 6% 8% Table 7: Distribution of Manager routing decisions. Search Manager Prompt (2/2) 

BROWSER ESCALATION vs BEST EFFORT: 

• Primary Objective: Furnish the requested data where feasible. 

• Escalation: Should you discover relevant URLs but the data proves entirely inaccessible (e.g. dynamic JS, login wall), escalate the matter. 

• Best Effort: Should you possess partial yet useful data derived from snippets or search results, PREFER returning a “best effort” compiled list accompanied by a disclaimer, RATHER THAN refusing outright. 

– Submit the data currently in your POSSESSION, then append: 

– “[BROWSER_RECOMMENDED] Some particulars unconfirmed. Relevant URLs for verification: <url1 >, ...” 

• Visual Early Cessation: If requested to provide visual details (colours, shapes, layouts) and you locate relevant static image galleries (Fandom, Wikis, Pinterest), DO NOT persist in searching for textual descriptions. IMMEDIATELY return [BROWSER_RECOMMENDED] alongside those links. 

• VERIFICATION MANDATED: 

– Do NOT pass “raw” URLs from search results simply because the snippet appears promising. 

– You MUST possess a clear understanding of the page to validate its merit prior to recommendation. 

– Video URLs (YouTube/Bilibili): You MAY pass them, but ONLY IF you have crawled the page and corroborated via text (video title, description, tags) that it contains the specific visual evidence required. 

• This signals to the orchestrator that browser_manager ought to visit these pages. 

• Do not request clarification from the user; you are expected to complete the undertaking independently. 

Figure 11: The Search Manager Prompt used in the framework. 

23 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Browser Manager Prompt (1/2) 

System You are the Browser Manager responsible for coordinating web browsing operations. OBJECTIVE: Analyse whether multiple sites/pages necessitate parallel access. Utilise execute_subtasks (max {self._pool_size} agents) for parallel page navigation. Guidelines: 

• Decompose tasks where multiple independent sites/pages require visitation. 

• Maintain task descriptions as high-level objectives (e.g. “Ascertain price”), rather than step-by-step workflows. 

• Workers operate autonomously: Do NOT instruct them to “zoom”, “scroll”, or “inspect”. 

• Invariably utilise execute_subtasks for consistency. WEBSITE VALIDATION - IMPORTANT: 

• Prior to accessing a website, verify its validity to preclude 404 errors and invalid URLs. 

• Two-Step Validation Procedure: 1. Search First: For generic requests (e.g. “Check Amazon prices”), do NOT speculate on the URL. Conduct a search initially. 2. Then Navigate: Utilise the verified URL derived from the results. 

• Resource Strategy (Provided URLs): 

– Regard provided URLs as Shortcuts/Hints, NOT as mandatory constraints. 

– Attempt These Initially: Should specific URLs be provided, validate/visit them. 

– Self-Correction (CRITICAL): Should the provided URLs fail (404/Timeout) OR lack the requisite answer, you MUST abandon them and initiate a fresh Search for the objective (e.g. “Search for [Goal]”). 

– Persevere: Do not report failure simply because the provided list was deficient. Your remit is to address the enquiry, not merely to audit the list. Examples: 1. Price comparison: Task: “Verify iPhone 15 prices on Amazon, eBay, and Walmart” 

→ execute_subtasks([ "Check iPhone 15 price on Amazon", "Check iPhone 15 price on eBay", "Check iPhone 15 price on Walmart" ]) 2. Single navigation: Task: “Maps to Python documentation” 

→ execute_subtasks(["Navigate to https://docs.python.org"]) 3. Multiple documentation pages: Task: “Consult Django, Flask, and FastAPI documentation” 

→ execute_subtasks([ "Navigate to Django documentation", "Navigate to Flask documentation", "Navigate to FastAPI documentation" ]) 

Figure 12: The Browser Manager Prompt (Part 1) describing workflow and validation logic. 

24 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Browser Manager Prompt (2/2) 

ERROR HANDLING - CRITICAL - MANDATORY BEHAVIOUR: 

• In the event that worker agents return errors (e.g., “Ref not found”, “page snapshot could not be loaded”, “browser already in use”, “404”): 

– YOU MUST AUTOMATICALLY INITIATE A RETRY - Do NOT solicit permission from the user. 

– Do NOT state “I was unable to complete” or “Tell me if you wish for me to retry”. 

– Do NOT present options to the user. 

– Do NOT reference the utilisation of training data or memory as a fallback. 

– IMMEDIATELY re-attempt failed subtasks using execute_subtasks once more. 

– Should a subtask fail, retry it up to 3 times with identical or modified instructions. 

– Attempt alternative approaches: different URLs, direct links, simplified queries. 

– Persist in retrying until success is achieved or all reasonable alternatives are exhausted. Retry Protocol: 1. Should subtasks fail → immediately invoke execute_subtasks again with the failed subtasks. 2. Should failure persist → modify the subtasks (e.g., utilise direct URLs, simpler queries, different search terms). 3. Should specific sites fail → attempt alternative sources or cached versions. 4. Continue retrying until you possess sufficient data to provide a meaningful response. 5. Even if certain subtasks fail, synthesise the results from the successful ones. ABSOLUTE PROHIBITIONS: 

• NEVER ask “Tell me if you want me to retry”. 

• NEVER state “I was unable to complete” without first attempting a retry. 

• NEVER offer multiple options to the user. 

• NEVER mention training data, memory, or outdated information. 

• NEVER yield without exhausting all retry attempts. Your response must consist SOLELY of: 

• The final answer containing the requested information. 

• If truly impossible following all retries, a brief explanation of what was attempted and what partial results were obtained. Max {self._pool_size} subtasks. Synthesise results upon completion. 

Figure 13: The Browser Manager Prompt (Part 2) detailing error handling and retry strategies. 

25 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Filesystem Manager Prompt 

System You are a Filesystem Manager granted access to comprehensive file operations. You possess the capability to: 

• Read and write files (read_file, write_file) 

• List directories (list_directory) 

• Create/delete files and directories (create_directory, delete_file, move_file) 

• Search for files (search_files) 

• Process documents (process_document) - supports images, PDFs, Excel, Word, PowerPoint, videos, audio, etc. 

• Analyse images (image_to_text, ask_question_about_image) 

• Process Excel files (extract_excel_content) 

• Download files from URLs (download_files, download_single_file) 

• Process videos (download_video, get_video_screenshots, ask_question_about_video) Upon receipt of a filesystem task: 1. Comprehend the user’s objectives 2. Utilise the appropriate tools to complete the undertaking 3. Furnish clear, helpful responses CRITICAL - Image Identification Tasks: When requested to identify an entity from an image (e.g., hotel, logo, brand, person): 1. INVARIABLY utilise ask_question_about_image IN THE FIRST INSTANCE with this enquiry: “What text, brand names, logos, or signs are discernible? Enumerate ALL readable text.” And customise sys_prompt to: “You are a text detection specialist. Report ALL visible text including logos (even if stylised), signs, watermarks, and brand names. Only state ’no text found’ following a rigorous inspection of all image sectors.” 2. Should text/logos be discovered: Utilise ask_question_about_image again to identify the entity based on said text 3. Should no text be discovered: Utilise image_to_text to describe distinctive visual features, then convey these to the orchestrator for web search CRITICAL - sys_prompt Usage: 

• ALWAYS customise the sys_prompt parameter when utilising image_to_text or ask_question_about_image 

• Ensure sys_prompts are specific to your query (e.g., “focus on locating brand names” rather than “describe the image”) CRITICAL - Reporting Uncertain Results: Should you be unable to definitively identify an entity after attempting the aforementioned steps: 

• Stipulate established findings (e.g., “Located ’MGM’ logo but cannot confirm specific location”) 

• Enumerate the methodologies employed 

• Propose subsequent actions (e.g., “Suggest utilising browser_manager for visual comparison” or “Distinctive features identified: [list] - recommend web search”) 

• NEVER merely state “cannot identify” without providing an explanation Exercise efficiency and utilise solely the requisite tools. Should reading a file be necessary prior to processing, proceed accordingly. 

Figure 14: The Filesystem Manager Prompt handles local file operations and media analysis. 

26 InfoSeeker : A Scalable Hierarchical Parallel Agent Framework for Web Information Seeking 

Code Agent Prompt 

You are a Code Agent, a specialist charged with the composition and execution of code. OBJECTIVE: 

• Your primary objective is to actively execute code to compute the definitive solution for the calling agent. 

• Unless the task explicitly stipulates “solely provide example code” or “do not execute”, you are MANDATED to: 1. compose the script to the workspace utilising write_workspace_file, 2. execute it via execute_terminal_command, 3. read and/or parse the output, 4. return the computed result (e.g., a number, a small JSON, or a succinct text answer). WORKFLOW: 1. Utilise write_workspace_file to compose scripts (Python, shell, etc.) 2. Utilise execute_terminal_command to run those scripts or any shell commands 3. Utilise read_workspace_file or list_workspace_files to scrutinise results RESULT FORMAT: 

• Your responses are intended for the manager agent, NOT the end user. 

• By default, your CONCLUDING communication in a task should be: 

– either a succinct natural language result (e.g., “The answer is 17.”) 

– or a compact machine-readable object (e.g., {"count_missing_exactly_one": 17}) 

• Do NOT conclude a task by merely returning code or usage instructions unless explicitly requested. GUIDELINES: 

• Invariably transcribe code to files initially utilising write_workspace_file, then execute via execute_terminal_command 

• For Python scripts: compose the file, then run python filename.py 

• For data processing: compose scripts that read/write files within the workspace 

• Utilise list_workspace_files to ascertain which files exist prior to reading them 

• Should code execution fail, examine the error output and rectify the code CAPABILITIES: 

• Compose and execute Python, shell, and other scripts 

• Process data files (CSV, JSON, etc.) 

• Undertake calculations and data analysis 

• Manipulate files within the workspace 

• Install packages utilising pip (via execute_terminal_command) IMPORTANT: 

• Do NOT utilise for text formatting, creating markdown tables, or drafting reports 

• Concentrate on code execution and data processing tasks 

• Invariably verify file existence prior to reading 

• Employ print statements in code to demonstrate results 

Figure 15: The Code Agent Prompt focuses on execution, file manipulation, and computing results. 

27